Chapter 1 (U) An Academic in Need of the Navy \... Until

\(U) America\'s communications intelligence services were even more
dependent on outsiders during the 1930s than they were during the Cold
War. Neither the army nor the navy had enough resources to be
technological innovators. They could not afford their own research and
development programs, and they did not have enough money to tempt the
scientific and industrial sector into concentrating on the cause of
advanced military technology. All the army and navy branches suffered,
but those whose functions were not highly valued by the military found
innovation far beyond their reach. Communications intelligence was among
the disinherited.

\(U) When it appeared that technology was about to outrun the established
cryptanalytic methods, the American army and navy\'s communications
intelligence services had to find ways to compensate for their
inadequate budgets and the absence of relevant research and development
departments within the military.

\(U) The navy was the first to try to muster new technologies to conquer
advances in code and cipher systems. As early as 1930, one of its more
progressive leaders, Stanford Hooper, sought ways to overcome the
financial and organizational constraints on innovation in cryptanalysis.
The barriers were so great that Hooper could not take a direct route to
the creation or even the acquisition of modern calculating and data
processing instruments. He did not have the funds to underwrite an
independent development project within the navy or within the leading
corporations. He had to do the best he could with what help could be
obtained and do it without obligating the navy to any major financial or
institutional burdens.

\(U) Hooper\'s odyssey led him to all those he thought might be willing
to give the navy help without asking too much in return. Among the many
contacts he made during the 1930s, one was of special importance to the
history of computers and the cryptanalytic rapid analytical machines
(RAM). Hooper was able to make an arrangement with Vannevar Bush of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

\(U) To understand the complex, near byzantine histories of the
development of computers for cryptanalysis, especially the path-breaking
RAM program, and to appreciate the difficulties of linking science and
codebreaking, the biography of one of the leading high-tech universities
is required. As well, the life of one of the most important figures in
the history of applied science, Vannevar Bush, needs to be sketched. Of
special importance is the work Bush had begun for other purposes. His
attempts to build innovative machines for scientific calculation and for
data retrieval determined what technologies he recommended as the basis
for the first modern cryptanalytic machines.

\(U) An Institution for the Real World

\(U) Since its birth on the eve of the Civil War, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology had been devoted to applying science to
practical affairs. Its founders rejected much of the curricula of the
traditional American liberal arts college as well as the simple
vocational program of the trade school. They made MIT an example of how
practical men who worked in cooperation with the new institutions of
science and industry could turn a university into a force for positive
change. Its founders, such as William Barton Rogers, wanted to create
men of vision, men who would bring the benefits of technology to a
backward

TOP SECHET/KOMINT/mEL TO U8A, AU3, CAM, OOR AND NZU/XI




America. Rogers and his colleagues were the buDders of some of the most
important instruments of the American industrial revolution. Their
famous Comparator, for example, allowed the exact replication of
mass-produced parts.1 The name \"Comparator\" was probably selected for
Bush\'s 1930s cryptanalytic machine because of the earlier MIT device
created by the Institute\'s founders.

\(U) Rogers initiated MITs long-term policy of conducting research for
business and government agencies and of having its faculty actively
engaged in technological and business efforts. MIT was badly hit by the
recession of the 1870s, and its future remained unsure until the
watershed years of American life in the 1890s. Then, with a more secure
financial condition and a growing body of alumni and friends who had
benefited from the work of its faculty, the Institute expanded its
curricula, acquired modern equipment, and established itself as a force
in American academic and industrial life. The Institute gained a solid
reputation in civil and mechanical engineering, architecture, naval
construction, chemistry, and electrical engineering. By the 1920s the
sparkling electrical engineering department added a focus on the new
fields of electronics and communications. The inauguration of Samuel W.
Stratton as MITs president in 1923 accelerated the shift to electronics
and reinvigorated the school\'s attempts to create measurement devices
for industry and science. Stratton\'s background and interests blended
with those of MIT. Stratton\'s interests and goals fit with those of the
Institute\'s faculty, especially some of the younger men who sought
administrative approval of their visions for MIT. All at the Institute
seemed to agree that more support should be given to research, and most
hoped that the school would become a center for the application of
formal mathematics to engineering problems. One of the junior faculty
with such a hope was Vannevar Bush. The harmony between Bush\'s and
Stratton\'s views had much to do with the younger man\'s success. Bush
received critical

support from Stratton, allowing him to become one of the most important
men in the history of American science and technology.

\(U) A Man for All Technologies

\(U) A generation later, at the end of World War II, Vannevar Bush was
one of the most powerful scien1\^ tists the world had ever

known and a man familiar to most Americans. The heritage of his policies
continues to shape \\WJ the organiza\'\*f\^\^\*j-:\*\~ tion of academic
research in

America. Although M vannevar his plan for a federal

role in science was not completely fulfilled, the National Science
Foundation is testimony to his influence.2 Bush was important because of
his influence in such matters as the beginnings of the atomic bomb
project and the establishment of the National Defense Research Committee
(NDRC) and the National Science Foundation. Despite his enormous
contributions while at MIT, despite his influence within the inner
circles during World War II and the Cold War, and despite his role in
shaping the nature of Big Science, and thus the modern American
university, little was written about him until very recently.3

\(U) The new interest has taken a rather unexpected turn. Instead of
focusing on his policy contributions, the spotlight has been on Bush\'s
role in the emergence of computers and information processing. The
research on his contributions to computers arose as the new field of
computer history was born in the 1980s. The seemingly more

::: {style="width: 24.53939631517052%;"}
:::


TOP SECnETttCOMINTOREl TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR ANP MZU/X1


TOP 6EGRET//CQMIHT//REL TO USA, AUG, CAM, OBR AND HZU/X1

intense interest in his role in the birth of information science was
generated by the rediscovery of Bush\'s work on automatic data
retrieval. His ideas for a mind machine, Memex, are now treated as the
origin of hypertext and similar knowledge systems/

\(U) More Than an Ingenious Yankee

\(U) Bush merged science with tinkering, if not technology. He was an
inventor and a natural at putting technology together in different
combinations to fulfill a need. His efforts were always goal-oriented
because he realized that inventions required a market to be successful.
Bush paid attention to the commercial aspects of technology and built an
enviable list of patents on devices ranging from thermostats and
typewriters to electronics.3

\(U) After receiving bachelor\'s and master\'s degrees in engineering
from Tufts, Bush gained some shop-floor experience while working for the
giant General Electric Corporation. He pushed himself to complete a
joint Harvard-MIT doctoral program in electrical engineering. He
suffered through a great deal of tedious calculation for his thesis.
Naturally, he searched for shortcuts to complete his mathematical
analysis of complex electrical circuits and applied some of the many
tricks mathematicians used before the advent of the modern computer. The
doctoral degree and the favorable impression Bush made on Dugald Jackson
of MIT soon proved of great value.6

\(U) Just out of school, Bush became associated with World War I\'s New
London Research Laboratory where the famous Robert Millikan brought the
nation\'s best men to focus science on the critical U-boat threat. Bush
contributed to the research with a significant detection system, joined
the Naval Reserve, and became at least a junior member of the national
military-scientific establishment.

\(U) A complex path eventually led to Bush\'s being one of the creators
of Raytheon, a company that was able to challenge RCA\'s patent monopoly
over radio. Raytheon became one of the many important companies tied to
MIT and its students.7 Bush\'s postwar entrepreneurial ventures did not
end his academic ambitions, however. He accepted a position as an
assistant professor in MITs Electrical Engineering Department. It was
understood that he would concentrate on the problems of high-power
transmission, a focus that was sure to attract support from the private
power companies which were beginning to construct large regional
networks. A string of articles on power problems and the mathematical
techniques useful for their solution advanced his academic standing.

\(U) The Politics of Mathematics and Engineering

\(U) Although Bush was a practical man, he was also a missionary for the
application of mathematics to engineering and science. He realized he
had limited formal mathematical skills, but he compensated by supporting
the work of men like the renowned Norbert Wiener. Wiener was brought to
MIT to integrate advanced mathematics with teaching and engineering
research. Bush also encouraged his students to expand the frontiers of
mathematical engineering, with some great results. Claude Shannon, a
father of mathematical information theory, was one of the many young men
influenced by Bush and Wiener. Bush successfully courted the leaders of
almost every high-tech related corporation in America. General Electric,
Eastman, NCR, General Motors and many other large corporations were
familiar Bush stomping grounds. Significant yet unexplained, Bush did
not develop cordial and profitable connections with the two major
manufacturers of calculating equipment, IBM and Remington Rand. History
would have been different if IBM had chosen MIT over Columbia and
Harvard Universities for its attention and if





Remington\'s leader had made a commitment to academic research.

\(U) Within a decade after his MIT appointment. Bush was a member of the
most important scientific organizations. Although the United States did
not have truly powerful scientific institutions, ones with the financial
resources to shape the course of research, such bodies as the National
Academy of Sciences, the National Research Council, and the National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics could influence what science policy
there was. They also provided invaluable contacts for their members. By
his late forties, Bush had become more than a member of such groups. He
was a statesman of American science.

\(U) The Manager of Science

\(U) After a long stint as dean and then as vice president of MIT, Bush
became a significant national influence. In 1938 he became the head of
the Carnegie Institution, one of the most important scientific research
agencies in the world. That led to his assuming the. leadership of World
War II\'s very powerful National Defense Research Committee. The NDRC
filtered hundreds of millions of dollars of government funds to
privately directed research for the war effort.8 The NDRC was an
improved and vastly expanded version of the World War I submarine
project and was the fulfillment of some of Bush\'s long-held dreams
about research in America. The NDRC allowed academics something close to
the best of all worlds: They received government funding free of most
bureaucratic direction. It also fit with Bush\'s belief that the
military would change only in response to outside pressures. By the end
of the war, Bush was the most powerful man in American science and was a
force the military had to recognize.9

\(U) Bush and Stratton\'s Dream

\(U) Bush began his work at MIT with research on electrical systems. In
the early 1920s, Bush directed his students to expand the reach of
analog computing. They began with rather simple combinations of rods and
gears to create machines for the automatic calculation of differential
equations, but those first integraphs were more than extensions of the
old wire and cone contraption that had made Stratton\'s reputation. The
young men edged towards solving the major mechanical problems that had
prevented the engineer\'s friend, the planimeter, from becoming a truly
powerful tool. By the late 1920s, Bush and his men were convinced they
had overcome the critical problem of torque. They persuaded Stratton and
the other influentials at MIT that a new and startling version of Lord
Kelvin\'s machines could be constructed and put to productive use in a
few years.

\(U) Bush was allowed to assign the best graduate students to the
creation of the Differential Analyser. In 1931, he announced to the
scientific community that the world\'s largest and most powerful
calculating machine stood ready at MIT to advance science and
engineering. It brought international fame to Bush and MIT.
International visitors came to the Institute and clones were built in
Europe and America. Aberdeen Proving Grounds and the University of
Pennsylvania built versions, and General Electric found it so useful it
invested in a copy for itself.

\(U) Bush Confronts Little Science

\(U) Just as Bush\'s Analyser was given so much by the Institute in the
late 1920s, the school lost its state subsidy. Worse, Stratton\'s hopes
that America\'s largest corporations would donate a constant stream of
funds to MIT proved unrealistic. MIT found it more and more difficult to
finance research with its own resources, and its leaders feared that it
might be. forced to retreat to the vocational model of technical
education. The





faculty, including Vannevar Bush, was on its own and all had to struggle
for the means to continue research and to finance their graduate
students. The Institute\'s new president of 1930, Karl T. Compton, was
as much apart of elite science as Stratton, but he was more academic in
orientation. A famous physicist, Compton arrived with a mandate to turn
the Institute back towards a true scientific curricula and to integrate
the latest science with both teaching and research. Wishing to reduce
the growing ethical and educational problems stemming from the staffs
business activities, and hoping to secure the funds needed to allow
internal financing of research, Compton let it be known that he desired
more effort for the Institute and less for faculty pocketbooks and
corporate sponsors.10 Informally, faculty were asked to conduct research
of general, not particular, import. Formally, consulting fees were to be
shared with the Institute, and patents were to become the property of
the school if the work had been internally funded. To control the
increasingly complex patent problems and to avoid the dangers inherent
in a university holding patents, MIT decided to turn to the Research
Corporation of New York City. It was to handle all patent matters
(including determination of patentability and allocation of shares to
MIT, sponsors, and faculty) and was to deal with all related legal
questions.

\(U) Even the great Vannevar Bush found it difficult to raise funds until
the second half of the 1930s. Bush launched upon an almost frantic
search for combinations of technologies that might attract sponsors.
Among other attempts of the 1930s, he toyed with a machine to identify
fingerprints; he tried to devise a high-speed pneumatic printer; he
played with the use of highspeed metal tape and wire systems to send
secret messages; and he tried to find ways to automate libraries. But he
suffered through many years without the kind of financial support that
Stratton\'s earlier policies had promised, and, most telling, he could
not find the financing need

ed for what emerged as his grand plan for the Institute.

\(U) Bush\'s Great Plan

\(U) After testing reactions at the Rockefeller and Carnegie Foundations,
and after considering his possible role in Compton\'s drive to make MIT
scientifically respectable, Bush put together a grand plan. It was one
he thought would attract a wide range of donors, would be applauded by
the scientific community, and would lead to a permanent source of
support for the Institute. As well, it would call upon the experience
and talents of faculty from several ofMITs departments. Bush decided to
make MIT the national center for calculation and for the development of
path-breaking scientific calculation devices. If Bush had his way, MIT,
not the National Bureau of Standards (NBS), would realize Stratton\'s
dream.

\(U) Bush knew that his Analyser had taken mechanical technology to its
extreme, so his plan for the Center of Analysis included much more than
proposals to extend mechanical analog calculation. Electronics,
photoelectricity, and new memory media were to be developed and combined
to produce revolutionary computers. Bush also wanted the center to
explore the new markets for what would later be called \"data
processing.\" His plans included digital calculation and machines to
solve the escalating problem of file management in science and
bureaucracy.11 He announced that he would create machines that would
outdistance all competitors, especially the IBM tabulator.12 Supported
by a group of gifted junior faculty and a cadre of adoring graduate
students, hejoined together all ofthe existing measurement and
calculating projects at the Institute and began to weave new ideas for
future devices.13

\(U) Beyond Analog Mechanical Machines

\(U) Mechanical analog devices were approaching their limits of precision
and speed in





the 1930s. Although there were no commercial competitors for such huge
devices as the Differentia\] Analyser, \'4 Bush saw little worth in
cloning it in slightly improved form. If support was to be found, he had
to make a major technological leap in analog computing. But there was a
more fundamental challenge and opportunity for the center: the growing
demand for digital calculation, something MITs machine builders had not
yet explored. The rise of the social sciences was creating a market for
digital calculators, and even engineers and physical scientists, who had
been so well served by analog devices for more than a century, were
tackling problems that called for digital methods. Bush also knew of the
increasing need for high-speed digital calculation in the bureaucratic
and business worlds. He sensed opportunity because there had not been a
major innovation in large-scale digital machinery since Hollerith
patented his Tabulator.

\(U) The call for digital processing merged with another growing need,
information retrieval. Business and governmental files had grown to
unmanageable proportions. The hand, mechanical, and electromechanical
methods of data retrieval were not satisfying bureaucratic demands.15
Influential researchers in many sciences found it increasingly difficult
to keep up with their areas of interest because of the deluge of
articles. Bush and many others lobbied for projects that would allow
scientists and engineers to take the lead in the new field of
Documentation.l6

\(U) Bush decided to concentrate on the exploitation of three
technologies: photoelectricity, digital electronics, and film. Although
new, these technologies were much closer to being ready for application
than the still delicate magnetic recording. By focusing on the
application of these technologies to scientific calculation problems,
Bush hoped to be innovative and to avoid conflict with commercial firms.

\(U) Responding to positive reactions by the Rockefeller Foundation, Bush
sketched a radical new design for an Analyser and, by mid-1936,
succeeded in raising the funds he needed to build the next generation of
his great analog machine. The Rockefeller Differential Analyser was to
be much faster and much easier to program than the mechanical version.
Although it remained an analog device, it incorporated electronics,
digital circuits, some photoelectric parts, and program tapes. These
allowed Bush to eliminate most of the cumbersome mechanical components
of the first model. The new Analyser soon became a very demanding,
over-budget, and behind-schedule drain on the resources of the Institute
and a burden to its students and faculty. The long-delayed appearance of
the Rockefeller Analyser also became a threat to the credibility of Bush
and the electrical engineering department.17 However, based on the new
developments in electronics, photoelectricity, and film, he was moving
into digital calculation and what we now call information retrieval. By
the mid-i930s, Bush had rough plans for an electronic \"programmed\"
computer and refined ideas about information machines.18

\(U) Two Men with a Need

\(U) A visit by Admiral Stanford C. Hooper and his young assistant,
Joseph Wenger, would lead to one of the most bizarre episodes in
American history, would complicate Bush\'s task of establishing his
center, and would link MITs foray into information machines with the
world of secrecy. The Hooper-Bush agreement for the development of
radically new cryptanalytic machines for the navy\'s codebreakers had
the potential to set a positive role for academic scientists in the
invention and evaluation of military technology. Its promise was not
realized, however. The project turned into an exercise in bureaucratic
bickering. More than half a decade was spent dealing with organizational
problems rather than with the technical barriers that were holding back
the realization of the potentials of electronic technology. Despite all
the efforts of Stanford C. Hooper,





Joseph Wenger, and Vannevar Bush, the United States lost an opportunity
to complete the first electronic data processing machines and to make
them operational before the attack on Pearl Harbor.

\(U) A Man for the Navy

\(U) Stanford C. Hooper prided himself on being an innovator, and he
devoted his career to introducing new technology to a usually reluctant
United States Navy. Graduating from Annapolis in the early 1900s and
assigned to the Pacific fleet, he immediately began to create the
navy\'s first radio system. Transferred to Washington, he stole hours to
study at Samuel W.

Stratton\'s new National Bureau of Standards. Mastering the latest radio
science, Hooper then lobbied for the establishment of the navy\'s own
radio research division. Hooper\'s expertise and advocacy of electronic
communications soon thrust him into military and civilian policy making,
Although still a young man and a junior officer, he was instrumental in
creating the Radio Corporation of America, the giant electronics
corporation formed at government request at the close of World War I.

\(U) Because of its need for worldwide command and control, the navy had
a special stake in the success of RCA Hooper hoped that RCA\'s special
position would make it confident enough to overcome the fear that
government work would threaten its patents. The hopes of RCA serving as
a research branch of the navy were not completely fulfilled, but Hooper
continued to use its men and facilities while he searched for help from
others.

::: {style="width: 29.008232065856525%;"}
:::

\(U) Stanford C.

\(U) By the early 1930s Hooper was advancing through the navy\'s ranks,
was a much-honored figure in electronics, and was an acquaintance, if
not friend, of the leading scientists and inventors of the nation. He
used such contacts and his expertise to devise and forward plans for a
fully integrated and modern information system for the navy, one which
was to include every advanced technology. He had an even greater vision:
to permanently wed science and the navy.19 He was determined to prevent
the navy from being as unprepared as it was for World War I. Hooper
became tied to those in favor of centralized administration and
increased power for the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO). Hooper began to
develop a strategy, one somewhat different from the plans of other of
the navy\'s new progressive reformers. He was willing to depend on
outsiders. Although he helped give birth to the Naval Research
Laboratory and was able to create special research sections, such as the
Code and Signal desk in the Bureau of Engineering, he believed the navy
would have to rely on the new research centers that were emerging in the
largest corporations and universities.

\(U) Ending his stay as head of the Bureau of Engineering\'s radio
section, where he fought for a radio modernization program, Hooper moved
from technical to more general policy concerns. His appointment as
Director of Naval Communications in 1928 gave him an opportunity to
aggressively pursue his vision. And, when he assumed the newly created
position of special scientific advisor for the navy in the mid-1930s and
chaired its Technical Research Liaison Committee, he had the chance to
expand his reach well beyond the traditional boundaries of
communications. All science-relat




TOP OCORCTOOOMIHTOnCL TO USA, AW, CAM, fiBF inri M7I f«1

ed fields, ranging from ballistics through medicine and atomic energy,
became part of his domain.20

\(U) He and his most trusted proteges toured the nation seeking ideas and
establishing contacts with scientists. As part of his plan, he laid the
bases for permanent cooperation with laboratories and executives at
Eastman, AT&T, General Electric, and a host of other corporations. To
create a similar link with the universities, he found a way to award
special military commissions to academics so they could remain in the
universities, yet be a part of the navy\'s modernization effort.2\* In
addition, he collaborated with the National Research Council aiding it
by finding projects and having it help the navy by identifying qualified
investigators.

\(U) The identification of willing scientists and new technologies was
only a small part of his task. A crucial and politically sensitive step
was to convince the various divisions of the navy to accept the civilian
men and ideas. The way Hooper handled that had a great deal of influence
on the longterm history ofthe automation of American cryptanalysis and
wedded the history of such machines asVannevar Bush\'s Comparator and
Selector to the broader straggle for professional control within the
navy.

\(U) Hooper\'s admiration for the country\'s top men led him to attempt
to force ideas upon unwilling navy bureaucrats and skeptical
technicians. Asa result, he alienated many powerful men. By 1937 serious
complaints reached the naval hierarchy about what was seen as
interference in the affairs ofthe various bureaus. Hooper had to defend
himself to the Chief of Naval Operations. After the confrontations and
the complaints to the CNO, Hooper softened his approach, but he
continued to advocate the types of technological innovations that did
not fit with the service\'s existing bureaucratic structure. He went
ahead with his effort to modernize and pro

fessionalize the navy, but the political battles of 1936 and 1937 took
their toll on him.

\(U) Even when ill health and perhaps some political complications
arising from his worries about America\'s military readiness22 led to a
reduction of his efforts in the 1940s, he remained an important advisor
on technical and scientific matters and a member of such high science
and big budget organizations as the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics. By the time he formally retired in 1943 he had, along with
a few other senior officers, laid the intellectual if not organizational
foundations for the Office of Naval Research. The ONR became the
organization the navy successfully used to bring academic science into
the military after World War II. The ONR became one ofthe major sponsors
of applied mathematics and computers in the United States.23

\(U) Hooper\'s influence did not end in 1943. Although retired, he
continued as a consultant to major corporations and became deeply
involved with a company founded by some of his admiring young men. The
fascinating postwar Engineering Research Associates (ERA) was planned as
a showcase for some of Hooper\'s dreams. It was to be a private company
serving the advanced scientific needs ofthe military. ERA became the
torchbearer for the navy\'s advanced cryptanalytic computers.

\(U) Another Plan for Science and the Navy

\(U) Hooper\'s model for research, which centered on cooperation with the
private sector, was not the only one put forward by navy reformers.
During the 1930s, one ofthe navy\'s progressives was much less trusting
of outsiders. Harold Bowen, one ofthe fathers ofthe Office of Naval
Research, put his energies to strengthening the navy\'s own science and
development capabilities. While chief ofthe Bureau of Engineering from
mid-1935 to 1939,\'M Bowen came in conflict with the Bureau of
Construction and its allies, the pri




T\"P fF\'\*FFT7r\'?MIMT\"nrl ™nri\> inr mil nnn miniHHHVi

vate shipbuilders. The issue was the design of the navy\'s new
destroyers. Bowen was the political loser and he remained convinced that
the secretary of the navy\'s order to merge Engineering and Construction
into one new agency, the Bureau of Ships, was a victory for the
technical and political Mossbacks. \^

\(U) Like Hooper, Bowen made many enemies because of his fight to keep
the navy up to date by bringing in new ideas from industry and academia.
Bowen wanted more research within the navy and had faith in a
revitalized Naval Research Laboratory. One of his last acts as chief of
the Bureau of Engineering was to create its Office of Research and
Inventions. With the experienced Lybrand Smith and some very
enthusiastic young officers on its staff, the ORI began to do what
Hooper bad been advocating for years: integrate Engineering with the
most talented men in private industrial research laboratories and
universities. The Office of Research and Inventions became the navy\'s
organization to coordinate with Bush\'s NDRC. That led Lybrand Smith and
Vannevar Bush to become quite close despite the growing frictions
between Bush and Bowen over research policies. Smith also became an
important player in the history of OP-20-G\'s first cryptanalytic
machines.

\(U) By the end of World War II, Smith and Bowen had convinced the navy
to create something Hooper had always wanted, the Office of Naval
Research. Bowen made sure the ONR had the money, power, and contracting
laws to control the relationships it established. The ONR would use
academia and industry to bring science to the navy, but it was given
enough power to allow the navy, not civilians, to direct research. Bowen
hoped that it also had enough power to withstand the protests of the old
bureaucrats and politicians.26 One of Bowen\'s motives for establishing
the ONR was to allow the navy to develop its own program for atomic
energy which, he hoped, would lead to an atomic-powered ship program.

\(U) Hooper Confronts the Bureaucracy, Again

\(U) Stanford Hooper viewed science, research, and innovation as
significant to every naval activity, but he maintained a special
interest and role in naval communications. His plans for advancing radio
communications led him to become involved with the navy\'s cryptanalytic
branch, OP-20-G. Hooper became a crusader for the expansion and
modernization of American interception, codebreaking, and all other
signals intelligence capabilities. It was that involvement that
eventually led Hooper to MIT in late 1935.

\(U) As with his electronics work, Hooper\'s plans for cryptanalysis came
to center on institutionalized scientific research. At the same time, he
supported the expansion of the navy\'s cryptanalytic operating division,
OP-20-G.

\(U) For historical reasons, Communications (OP-20) rather than the
Office of Naval Intelligence housed the cryptologic department that
became known as OP-20-G.27 And for other bewildering reasons, OP-20-G
depended upon the Bureau of Engineering for the design, purchasing, and
manufacture of its equipment. Another naval branch handled contractual
details. To further complicate the bureaucratic tangle, OP-20-G\'s
Research Section (Y) was the small group charged with communications
security and, significantly, the exploitation of the lack of security of
the communications of other nations. On top of that, and despite
OP-20-G-Y\'s mandate, yet another research group was set up within
Engineering to explore related technological questions. Adding to the
confusion over power and domain was the Naval Research Laboratory.
Although their core functions were under the direct command of the CNO
in the critical years of the 1930s, communications and cryptanalysis had
a tough go of it in the navy.





\(U) A Few Men and Women for Secrecy

\(U) The navy\'s very small ciyptologic group, OP-20-G, began its life
during World War I but was not active until the mid-i920s.28 One reason
for its inaction was that just as it was founded, the incredible Herbert
Yardley was lobbying for the creation of what became the famous American
Black Chamber. His group was to serve the cryptanalytic needs of the
army and the State Department, and, to some unknown degree, the navy.
Stealing resources away from the private cryptanalytic group that had
been developing at the estate of the flamboyant millionaire, Colonel
Fabyan, Yardley achieved some amazing victories. He broke the codes and
ciphers of the major powers. That allowed the United States to predict
the bargaining positions of the important players in the naval arms
limitation negotiations of the 1920s. Yardley\'s work made him some good
friends but also some enemies. A few rash decisions on his part also led
to the closing of his Chamber in 1929 and the transfer of its files to
the army\'s old code organization under William Friedman. Yardley then
decided to take one of the most fateful steps in the history of American
cryptanalysis. He published a book that told the when, what, and why of
American cryptanalytic success. One horrible consequence was that the
Japanese began to change all their code and cipher systems.29

\(U) OP-20-G did not receive much official navy support. Until the
mid-i920s, when it came under the command of a young and bright officer,
Laurance F. Safford, it was almost a shadow organization. Safford
arrived just in time to take advantage of the \"acquisition\"\' of a
copy of part of Japan\'s secret naval code. The code proved invaluable,
and OP-20-G began providing critical information to the navy. But that
did not mean recognition of the potentials of communications
intelligence or adequate funding. \"G\" might not have survived if it
had not been for a supersecret fund set up at the end of World War I.

\(U) OP-20-G\'s interactions with the Office of Naval Intelligence were,
at times, ones of strain as well as frustrating dependency. ONI did much
of the needed dirty work to obtain codebooks and information about
cipher machines,30 and it had the responsibility for interpreting the
intentions of America\'s enemies. But the ONI and OP-20-G were
bureaucratically separate, and at key times there was mistrust. \"G\"
also had less than satisfactory relations with naval commanders. The use
of\"G\'s\" information was dependent upon the decisions of local
commanders, and OP-20-G relied upon their willingness to supply
intercepts to Washington. Even serving only a technical cryptanalytic
role was difficult for \"G.\" It took many years for it to acquire any
control of what radio systems were to be monitored.

\(U) Captain

Laurance F.

Saffotri,

USN

::: {style="width: 25.80392156862745%;"}
:::

\(U) The Search for Pure Cryptanalysis

\(U) Through his academic and corporate contacts, Hooper learned of the
potentials of mechanized automatic control and of the increasingly
mathematical nature of science and cryptanalysis. His awareness of the
expanding reach of statistical techniques, the potentials of high-speed


■mo ccrpETHmwimiPEi ™ iica, amc rbm, rati Aim hti »



calculators, and the use of light-sensitive devices in astronomy were
perhaps sharpened by visits and discussions with Vannevar Bush.3\'
Whatever the particular source of his knowledge, Hooper believed that
the new electric and mechanical ciphering devices introduced by the
major powers, including the United States, would force cryptanalysts to
become statisticians. They would have to perform seemingly impossible
feats of calculation to penetrate the ciphers produced by such complex
machines as the Kryha and the Enigma.32

\(U) As soon as he assumed command over Communications, OP-20-G informed
Hooper of its progress against the cipher machines. The cryptanalysts
were quite proud of their secret and clever techniques, ones they
thought were essential because of the impracticality of a pure
mathematical approach.33 Although they employed statistical techniques,
they had effective short cuts such as finding a copy of a secret message
sent in a known code; locating often repeated phrases (cribs); or
uncovering the pattern of the way an enemy announced the wheel settings
for a cipher machine network. They were also quite proud of their
craftsmen\'s tools, such as paper wheels, long strips of wood with
alphabets painted on them, and overlay sheets with punched holes for
attacking ciphers. But Hooper and his new right-hand man, Joseph Wenger,
were not impressed by the tricks, and they thought that OP-20-G\'s
technology, if not methods, were woefully behind the times. In late 1930
Hooper suggested to OP-20-G and the Bureau of Engineering that they
begin to develop automated cryptanalytic machines and, by implication,
to formalize their approach to analysis.34

\(U) Hooper wanted machines that would free OP-20-G from tricks and
dependencies and that would allow the use of advanced mathematics. Those
machines would have to be innovative because the new cipher devices
presented cryptanalysts with problems far different from those of code
systems. Codes were secret lists of words (or

(combinations of numbers) that stood for other words. In contrast,
cipher machines dynamically changed letters into different ones with no
predictable relationship between the original and the cipher letters.
The limited vocabulary of a code meant that acquiring a copy of its
codebook was an effective solution, unlike the situation with
sophisticated cipher machines in which having a copy of the enemy\'s
machine was only a small step toward reading messages. The key method an
analyst used to solve a code was to identify the relationships between a
particular code word and other words. Correlation analysis and the use
of a decoded word to predict the meaning of another were viable methods.

\(U) The new cipher systems demanded less obvious approaches. The cipher
system designers\' goal during the 1920s and 1930s was to avoid the
meaning embedded in any code system. The American Hebern cipher machine
and its European cousins, such as Enigma, took the old principle of
random substitution of one letter for another to a new level. They went
far beyond the centuries-old cipher tables and handy substitution
algorithms.

\(U) All of the new machines relied upon sets of wired rotors (or relay
analogs of them) whose internal electrical connections produced a unique
substitution cycle of such complexity and length that it could be
penetrated only through time consuming analysis of forbidding amounts of
data. Unless the operators of the encryption machines made a mistake, or
the cipher breakers had a constant source of information on the settings
of the cipher wheels, incredible amounts of calculation were needed for
pure cryptanalysis. Hooper was sure that the growing use of the new
cipher machines and the shortage of experienced cryptanalysts meant an
end to the power of informal methods. He saw no alternative but to
develop formal techniques and advanced machines.

\(U) More than an abstract faith in scientific cryptanalysis led to
Hooper\'s drive for new


Pige 17



machines. There were very practical reasons. \"G\" had to be made
independent and ready for an emergency. Older methods, for either codes
or ciphers, demanded too many experienced codebreakers who had spent
years working on particular systems and on information supplied to
OP20-G by others such as Naval Intelligence. Automation and formal
procedures would have to substitute for professional skill and
experience as well as the old codebreaker\'s standby, intuition.

\(U) But in 1930 the navy\'s bureaucracy and even the crew at OP-20-G
were less than accepting of formal analysis and machinery. The
codebreakers atOP-20-G were aware of the emergence of the new ciphering
devices and, in fact, were building their own versions as well as
tackling the systems of other nations. Because of their direct
experience with automatic enciphering devices, Hooper\'s September 1930
\"suggestion\" about methods and automation was not too well received.
OP-20-G\'s principal civilian cryptanalyst, Agnes Meyer Driscoll, did
not like the idea at all. Additionally, the cryptanalysts felt insulted
because Hooper\'s request contained an implicit criticism of their work
and skills. They thought that formal methods, while helpful, would never
replace an experienced codebreaker. And their years of work had taught
them that decryption was usually dependent upon some type of informal
initial entry into a system, whether it be a psychological insight, a
theft of materials, or the transmission of a message in both clear and
enciphered form.35 In addition to the codebreakers\' distrust of those
who proposed unrealistic methods and machines, the small OP-20-G staff
was too busy analyzing Japanese code systems to deal with methodological
speculations.36

\(U) Hooper thought he would eventually tempt OP-20-G into applying
formal methods by presenting it with a demonstration device. Hooper soon
arranged to have the Bureau of Engineering create anew section for
advanced code and signal research 37 and then made sure that someone who
would pursue his goals filled

::: {style="width: 23.363386907095258%;"}
:::

the post. A young officer who had been one of the first students in
OP-20-G, who had experience as a seagoing communications officer, and
who was already a protege of Hooper, was selected. Joseph Wenger, a
thirty-year-old Annapolis graduate, followed Hooper\'s cues and began a
search for new technologies for all aspects of communications with, of
course, an eye open for new devices for ciphering and deciphering
messages. With some interruptions caused by shifting naval assignments,
Wenger continued that search through the 1930s and 1940s, and he became
the driving force behind what became the most technically advanced
cryptanalytic agency in the world by the late 1940s.38

\(U) From Electronics to Electromechanics

\(U) In the early 1930s Hooper\'s academic contacts turned him towards
something much more innovative, the electromechanical tabulating
machines built by companies such as IBM and Powers. Hooper successfully
prodded the Chief of Naval Operations into sending a very specific and
strong directive to the Bureau of Engineering in late 1931.39 It ordered
the Bureau to devote resources to study the new optical sorters and
special devices for blind reading and came close to demanding that such
technologies be used to build a deciphering device.40 The CNO\'s mandate
included more than cryptanalytic investigations; it was a signal to
Hooper to intensify his efforts to

\(U) Joseph




TOP CCORCT//OOMIHT//REL TO USA AUb, LAN, OBR ANU NZU/X1

link science to the navy. Under pressure from Hooper, the Bureau
provided Wenger with the money needed to make a grand tour of America\'s
research laboratories. During his visits, Wenger encountered fantastic
new technologies that had at least long-term promise for solving the
difficult cryptanalytic problems, but most seemed to demand a protracted
and expensive development period.41 Wenger was especially disappointed
when he realized that optics and electronics were not quite ready to
produce a cryptanalytic machine.

\(U) Perhaps because of that and because of a sudden realization by
OP-20-G that it would need some type of mechanical aids, Wenger turned
his attention to a more established technology. The Hollerith and Powers
electromechanical tabulating and sorting machines were evolving into
quite sophisticated devices by the late 1920s. In addition, they were
machines that were immediately available for use and were commercially
produced. Wenger examined the Remington-Rand Powers tabulators used by
OP-20-G in 1932 and did enough research to allow Hooper to again, but
more authoritatively, suggest that OP-20-G investigate them. It was
difficult for the officer in charge ofOP-20-G, Laurance Safford, to
ignore Hooper\'s urging any longer.42 But Hooper\'s grand dream suffered
a temporary yet important setback.

\(U) Just as Wenger was exploring the various technical possibilities, it
was discovered that the Japanese had replaced their Red Code with a
completely revised set that could not be penetrated. Perhaps because
ofYardley\*s indiscretions, seven years of work on the previous code had
become valueless! OP-20-G\'s codebreakers knew they would be unlikely to
obtain a copy of the Blue Japanese code and the three other new systems
\*3 and decided to take on the formidable task of breaking the code
through pure methods. The Japanese continued to use the old type of
superencipherment, the modular addition of random numbers to the code
groups, so it was a rel

atively easy target. But the code itself, Wenger knew, would demand
years of work. Over 100,000 words had to be decoded. Such an effort
called for either vastly increased manpower or mechanical aides.44
Everyone knew that \"G\" was unlikely to be allocated more men.

\(U) In early 1932 OP-20-G\'s cryptanalysts studied Wenger\'s tabulator
survey and decided to select the type centered upon electrical rather
than mechanical reading of cards. Seeing Remington-Rand\'s system as
inflexible, they hurried to rent the electromechanical IBM tabulating
devices, ones built to handle alphabetic characters as well as numbers.
The punch card era seemed to have begun at OP-20-G.

\(U) Then the navy hierarchy declared that it was unwilling to fund the
experiment! Safford and Wenger did not give up. OP-20-G pressured the
Bureau of Engineering to scrape some funds from its already slim
budget,45 but the Bureau was able to raise only a few hundred dollars,
not several thousand, to start the project. It continued to piece
together small amounts during the 1930s to support the tabulators. But
it always felt that OP-20-G did not fully appreciate its efforts.46 Only
a machine or two arrived at OP-20-G, and their experimental use, which
soon turned into a necessity in the eyes of many atOP-20-G, survived
only as a near underground activity.

\(U) Despite the hand-to-mouth funding of its few machines, the OP-20-G
tabulator crew continued with its work and made major contributions to
the penetration of the new Japanese codes. The navy also explored new
ways to store data on IBM cards, and during the war it helped develop
special tabulating machines.

\(U) Ironically, OP-20-G\'s early 1930s tabulator-related achievements
had a negative influence. Although the search for cryptanalytic
technology and methods had been motivated by Hooper\'s deep fears
concerning the new automat




TOr SECWHWOMINT/mEL TO UflA, AU3, CAM, ODR and NZUttCI

ic ciphering machines, including Britain\'s,47 the crisis caused by the
change in Japan\'s older code system shifted attention to more immediate
problems and forced a commitment to available devices. The more
sophisticated machine options were dropped in favor of the tabulators.
The tabulators were well suited to many decoding procedures, especially
those calling for sorting and, later, collating operations, but they
were not the mathematical or truly high-speed statistical devices needed
to break into the new cipher machines.

\(U) The leasing of a few tabulators did not link IBM to any long-term
commitments to OP-20-G or Engineering. Although IBM played a significant
role in certain extensions of electromechanical technology before and
during World War II, it did little truly far-ranging research for the
cryptanalysts during the 1930s. While the use of tabulators was a great
step in the history of cryptanalysis, the commitment to tabulators took
away much of the incentive to make the great technological leap Hooper
had desired. The very hardpressed staff at OP-20-G had more than enough
to do to learn how to exploit the IBM equipment.

\(U) Then, when older cryptanalytic methods triumphed over Japan\'s new
cipher machine, the Red, there was little excuse for an emergency
development program. The success against Red undermined arguments that
an advanced inhouse developmental group should be established within the
Bureau.

\(U) A Young Man for the Future

\(U) Something else helped to turn the navy away from Hooper\'s plans for
truly advanced automated cryptanalysis. Joseph Wenger, Hooper\'s man in
the Bureau or Engineering, who had become an ardent believer in the
value of science and technology, was returned to sea duty in mid-1932.
He had supplied Hooper\'s grand outline for communications with the
details needed for OP-20-G\'s technical and organizational

future.48 As significant, while on sea duty, he refined and codified the
important method later known as traffic analysis (T/A). He combined
direction finding, callsigns, and traffic flows into a highly effective
tool.49 To prove the worth of the approach, he reconstructed the
Japanese naval maneuvers without being able to read the contents of the
radio signals.50 Although not appreciated by outsiders, even Hooper
during the early 1930s, T/A became a major factor in the American
victory in World War II.

\(U) The Dream Postponed, Again

\(U) Wenger\'s transfer to sea duty in 1932 allowed him to help unravel
Japan\'s naval tactics and to refine America\'s eavesdropping capability
in the Pacific, but it was near devastating to the cause of automating
code and cipher breaking. Almost as bad for Hooper\'s cause was Laurance
Safford\'s assignment to sea for four years. His absence until 1936
stretched the resources of OP20-G to the breaking point and left Hooper
without an in-house advocate. When Safford returned to Washington, the
growing crisis in the Pacific, including the sudden change of a major
Japanese code in 1936, left him with no time for experimentation.
Despite OP-20-G\'s dependency on the Bureau of Engineering for hardware
development, the engineering branch was left without a spokesman for
advanced cryptographic technology. What men Engineering could spare
became involved in the difficulties of inventing and manufacturing
electromechanical encryption devices. The bureau, along with the Naval
Research Laboratory, also faced increasing demands and few thanks for
radio and radar developments. At the same time, OP-20-G became deluged
with new and more difficult code and cipher problems as Japan carved out
its Asian empire. The tiny crew had little time for technological or
mathematical speculation.





\(U) The Dream Reborn, for a Moment

\(U) It was only Wenger\'s return in mid-1935 and the Roosevelt-Vinson
decisions to expand the navy that allowed Hooper to again pursue his
cryptanalytic goals. Wenger had the experience, the energy, and the
desire to restart the program, and naval expansion hinted at the
possibility of funding.52

\(U) The changes at OP-20-G in 1935 extended to more than the renewed
hopes for new research machinery. Wenger was made the head of OP-20G\'s
new research desk. The new \'Y\'section was to be devoted to the
application of science to cryptanalysis and to the type of long-term
planning development that the CNO was encouraging in all parts of the
service.53 Then, when Safford came back to Washington in 1936, Wenger
began another round of visits to the centers of American science and
technology. Among those Hooper visited in 1935 and then recommended to
Wenger was a man he had known for years, Vannevar Bush.54

\(U) Bush, Wenger, and Hooper joined forces at a time when their
interests seemed to be in perfect harmony and when they thought they had
the resources and power to initiate and complete a major program.
Bush\'s scientific status was perhaps the major reason why Hooper looked
to MIT rather than to the large corporations such as National Cash
Register or IBM or RCA or to the National Bureau of Standards for help
in automating American cryptanalysis. On a gentlemen\'s agreement, Bush
began to draft a plan for the navy, and Wenger returned to Washington
filled with enthusiasm. He was convinced that the \$10,000 consulting
fee Bush expected was a great bargain. Bush dashed off his report and
submitted it in the first weeks of 1936. He was able to respond so
quickly because of the optics-filmelectronics work he and his colleagues
at MIT had been doing for several years. Of great importance, he had
begun thinking of and lobbying for the

development of electronic cryptanalysis well before 1935-55

\(U) Bush\'s initial proposition was not for the production of specific
equipment. Rather, it defined his role as that of a consultant to the
navy. He sketched the general outlines for a long-term project centered
about the creation of high-speed optical-electronic devices which would
be hundreds of times more powerful than the tabulators. He recommended
that the navy design and develop what became known in the intelligence
community as Rapid Analytical Machines (RAM). Everything finally seemed
to be falling into place for them and Bush in early 1936.

\(U) Little Science Meets the Little Navy, Again

\(U) Hooper thought he was having Bush subsidize his great plan for the
navy. Bush thought the navy would subsidize the beginnings of MITs
calculation center and its entry into digital processing. Wenger thought
he had a set of ideas that would launch the navy on a full-scale
development project. None of them realized there were built-in
conflicts. Hooper probably did not know of the financial pressures on
Bush and MIT during the 1930s. In turn, Bush did not suspect that Hooper
and Wenger had not convinced the navy of the worth of their approach to
introducing innovations.56

\(U) Just as the prospects for Bush\'s center rapidly brightened and as
Hooper was receiving signals that his comprehensive plan for all
communications activities would be approved, the navy made an
unexpected, critical, and disappointing decision. For a second time the
attempt to revolutionize cryptanalysis seemed to have been defeated by
the tangled navy bureaucracy and the men Bowen called \"mossbacks\"!
Before Bush\'s navy project truly got under way, he and his naval allies
became involved in an organizational nightmare. Bush thought freedom
from interference was essential if academia and the





military were to join together, and he believed that no absolute
timetables and guarantees could be given for truly innovative work.
Hooper and Wenger agreed that heavy-handed bureaucratic oversight would
doom any creative effort. Wenger hoped that Bush\'s status and
persuasive powers would be able to break the navy bureaus\' resistance
to outsiders. But the naval bureaucracy had a different opinion.

\(U) The Bureau of Engineering men very bluntly told Hooper and Wenger
that Bush\'s plans were unrealistic and his demands outrageous. They
were soon joined by the contracting arm of the navy, which declared many
parts of Hooper\'s model for academic/military cooperation ill advised,
if not illegal. They would not give the needed approval, and the project
that could have led to the creation of the first electronic digital data
processing device seemed dead in early 1936.

\(U) A Man for Statistics

\(U) Just as Stanford Hooper was facing the defeat of his hopes of
creating anew technology for cryptanalysis, another major figure in the
history of American codebreaking was becoming entangled with automation.
William F. Friedman, the head of the army\'s cryptologic section,
finally convinced the army to allow him to use tabulators. Although
their introduction into the army\'s Signal Intelligence Service (SIS)
came almost five years after Hooper and Wenger had brought them into
OP-20-G, the arrival of the IBM machines at the SIS offices seemed
revolutionary.

\(U) In 1929-30, just as Hooper was trying to refurbish naval
communications, the army had to fill the void left by the disintegration
ofYardley\'s Black Chamber. Instead of creating an entirely new
organization, it gave additional mandates and some additional resources
to the man it had previously hired to safeguard its own communications,
William F. Friedman. Unlike Wenger or Hooper, Friedman had not come to
code work

through the military; rather, he stumbled into it because of his college
courses in genetics.

\(U) The son of a Hungarian-Russian-Jewish immigrant, Friedman attended
an advanced technical high school where he delved into electrical
engineering. But his interest in the new field of scientific agriculture
led him to one of America\'s centers of applied science, Cornell
University. After finishing heavily statistical courses in genetics, and
gaining experience in research at one of the prestigious Carnegie
centers, Friedman decided to postpone gaining a Ph.D. He wanted and
needed a job. He accepted a position as a research geneticist for one of
America\'s most influential agricultural businessmen, Colonel George
Fabyan. Assigned to Fabyan\'s estate at Riverbank, Illinois, just as
Europe was becoming engulfed in war, Friedman soon found himself busy
with Fabyan\'s private cryptanalytic projects rather than with the
development of hybrid cottons. When Fabyan offered his staff and his
estate to the United States government for cryptanalytic training for
the war effort, Friedman\'s future was set.

\(U) His energies were turned to applying the new statistical techniques
he learned at Cornell to cryptanalysis. His cryptoattacks and his
training methods became legendary. As a result, after the war the United
States Army asked him to establish a code agency. Because Herbert
Yardley\'s Black Chamber held the mandate for listening to

::: {style="width: 23.607843137254903%;"}
:::

\(U) WiHian F. Friechan


IUH bElKEIJJCOMIHTOllCL TO U3A, AU3, GAM, ODR AND NULtfXI


TOP SeeRET//eOMIMT/mgL TO U3A, AU3, CAM, QDR AND NZU/X1

the communications of others, Friedman was asked to focus on the
protection of army communications and on the preparation of training
manuals for wartime cryptanalysis. Although concentrating on those
tasks, Friedman did not abandon code and cipher breaking. He was called
on to test various proposed systems, including cipher machines the navy
thought of purchasing.57

\(U) Friedman\'s role began to change in 1929 when Yardley\'s group was
under political threat. The army decided to found its own operational
cryptanalytic group. It gave Friedman the funds he needed to hire a
group of young civilians, and it gave him Yardley\'s files. Perhaps it
gave him access to Yardley\'s old sources of intercepts. Friedman
trained his young men in codebreaking and made sure they learned about
formal statistics and foreign languages by enrolling them at a local
university. Meanwhile, his wife, also a Riverbank alumna, became the
cryptologist for the Coast Guard.58 While her crew worked on the
clandestine messages of rum runners and other criminals, Friedman\'s
team examined as much diplomatic and military traffic as it could obtain
through the very limited intercept capabilities of the army.59

\(U) Together, the Friedmans blended practical experience with statistics
to develop more powerful cryptanalytic tools. Although Friedman did not
attempt to make the direct links with elite academics that Hooper was
forging for OP-20-G, he was proud of the \"scientific\" character of his
methods.

\(U) Those statistical methods and knowledge of many of the machine
activities at\"G\" soon led Friedman to seek a means of automating the
army\'s codemaking and codebreaking work. Beginning a few years later
than the navy, Friedman tried to acquire IBM tabulators for his office.
He faced almost as many frustrations as Hooper and Wenger but finally
acquired some machines in late 1934.60 By 1937 he and his crew had
developed several tabulator methods that

became classic means of cryptanalytic attack, and they began to turn the
tabulators into more specialized cryptologic tools. He and one of his
young men, Frank Rowlett, invented an attachment for the tabulating
equipment that allowed it to generate \"random\" code.61

\(U) Friedman began to develop visions of a greater technological future
for cryptanalysis. But, unlike Hooper and Wenger, he did not seek help
from outsiders, at least not in the 1930s. Perhaps that was because his
research ambitions, even more than \"G\'s,\" were smothered by the
military bureaucracy. Friedman did not have a Hooper to ran interference
for him with the Signal Corps. For whatever the reasons, Friedman\'s
automation efforts were less adventurous and more limited than Wengefs.
He had noVannevar Bush and no ties to the nation\'s scientific elite.

\(U) In the mid-i930s Friedman concentrated on plans for putting teletype
tape readers, relays, and plugboards together in various combinations.
Some of those became outlines of his own versions of Index of
Coincidence machines and isomorph locators (pattern finders).62 And, at
the end of the decade, he somehow found the money to hire an MIT
electrical engineer, Leo Rosen. Rosen had a solid background in
electronic tubes and circuits. Perhaps Friedman hired him with an eye to
beginning his own version of the navy\'s electronic RAM program.

\(U) Science and the Navy Need Other Friends

\(U) Tn early twentieth century America, corporations and private
foundations were more important than government or higher education. As
a result, corporate research policies and decisions by the leaders of
the philanthropic foundations played a determining role in the history
of Bush\'s and Hooper\'s crusades. Decisions by Eastman-Kodak, AT&T,
IBM, and especially the National Cash Register Company were critical to




IUH btUHbltitUHIHIJJHEL 10 USA, AUS, CAM, QDR aiiU NZU/XI

the emergence of the machines for cryptanalysis and for the library. As
late as the 1930s, the scientists\' lobbying efforts to make pure
science one of the targets of federal support were failures. They were
rebuffed by Congress as well as by the usually open-handed Franklin D.
Roosevelt. As a result, there was no pure science program in the nation.

\(U) The Private World of Science

\(U) During the first forty years of the twentieth century, the nation\'s
scientists looked to two sets of foundations, those created by Andrew
Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller. Their fortunes, generated by the
technological revolution of the nineteenth century, became the fuel for
American academic science.

\(U) Their decision in the 1920s to finance research within the elite
American universities was critical to the history of American science.
As important, they created the first bureaucracies designed to manage
long-term, very expensive scientific programs. Those programs accounted
for perhaps as much as 90 percent of such activity during the 1920s and
1930s, and their managers became key players in the shaping of
scientific institutions during and after World War IL63 The
administrators of the 1930s private foundations, including Vannevar
Bush, became the overlords of 1940s science and then became the leaders
of the early Cold War scientific and high-tech agencies.

\(U) As outside research became more attractive, the Carnegie and
Rockefeller foundations turned to the old national science institutions
for help. The National Academy of Sciences and the National Research
Council were energized with foundation monies and began to act as
scientific go-betweens. The NRC managed many projects for Carnegie,
advised other foundations about national needs, and recommended worthy
scientists.64 After those first steps, the foundations began to help
some individual academic

researchers just as MITs new president launched his faculty, including
Vannevar Bush, on a sweep for research funds. Very important to Bush
were the decisions by one of the new young administrators at the
Rockefeller Foundation, Warren Weaver.

\(U) A Man for Applied Mathematics and Information

\(U) Warren Weaver was one of those new bright scientific men brought to
the foundations to reformulate policy. Central to Weaver\'s plan for the
revamped natural science division of the Rockefeller Foundation was the
creation of instruments to encourage the use of mathematics in every
field. By the mid-i930s Bush convinced Weaver that the world of science
was ready for new generations of Analysers. Then Weaver successfully
lobbied his superiors for aSio,ooo study grant for Bush\'s proposed
partially electronic machine. Just a year later, he secured an
astounding 885,000 for the Rockefeller Analyser project atMlT.63 Haifa
dozen years later, Weaver again showed his faith in MIT when he funded
another huge computer project at the Institute, one for an electronic
digital programmed computer.

66

\(U) American Science and the War - the NDRC

\(U) Only a few in America realized that Germany was inventing anew type
of high technology warfare and that fundamental science might be needed
to combat the horrors of atomic weapons and long-range bombers. Vannevar
Bush and his close scientific friends were among those few. Never a man
to sit by and let the world determine his fate, Bush sought ways to
ensure a flow of academic contributions to the war effort.67 Bush
energized what became one of America\'s first modern science interest
groups and began to lobby the government to support a wide range of new
programs. Bush convinced President Roosevelt to create the powerful and
well-funded




top cccncT/;ooMiNT//ni:L to uoa, auo, can, obr anp hzu/xi

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) in June 1940.Within a year,
its scope and its powers to initiate and control projects were vastly
expanded. The new Office of Scientific Research and Development was a
dream come true for Bush. It was almost the perfect science foundation
for elite American academics.

\(U) The NDRC was responsible to the president, not the military or
Congress, and its scientists could determine what projects to begin or
end. Hundreds of millions of dollars came under the control of the NDRC.
The NDRC and elite science were subsidizing science as well as potential
weapons. Administrators of foundation science, who were friends of the
universities, were selected to head the major branches of the NDRC. The
old Carnegie-Rockefeller circle, which included the leading men from the
leading universities, moved from private to military philanthropy during
the war and, along with Bush, were able to circumvent the \"mossbacks\"
in the military and the older organizations of science. In the fall of
1940, the NDRC began to explore defense technologies that were too
speculative for the military or its older industrial allies. Of great
importance was the computer effort headed by Warren Weaver.

\(U) Because of Weaver\'s mathematical background and his prewar
experience evaluating computing proposals, Bush made him head of the
mathematical and scientific instrument section of the NDRC. One of his
first chores was to develop a program to solve technical problems
created by the advance of German military technology. There was a vital
need for automatic control of antiaircraft weapons, high-speed counters
for ballistic tests, and scientific instalments to monitor atomic
processes.68 In each case Weaver turned to electronic solutions. He
called upon all those known to have worked in electronic counting and
launched a program for the development of special purpose devices. He
soon had the computer builders George Stibitz and Sam Caldwell to help
him supervise the work. As important, he was able to pursue another
opportunity. He cre

ated a center for applied mathematics. It would permanently change
academic mathematics in America.

\(U) The NDRC was a blessing to Bush and his academic friends, but to
others it was a politicized and unnecessary organization that threatened
the military research agencies such as the Naval Research Laboratory.69
To Admiral Bowen, Bush was leading a group bent on playing favorites
among the military services and the universities. He soon concluded that
the NDRC worked to the disadvantage of the navy. To Admiral Hooper,
however, Bush and the NDRC appeared, at least at the beginning, to be
the only way the intelligence community could acquire the advanced
machines it needed. But computers were far down on the NDRC list, and
cryptanalysis entered its world only because of the long chain of
associations between Bush, the navy, and the corporations and
universities that were at the center of the NDRC.

\(U) Corporate Charity

\(U) Vannevar Bush looked to the major corporations when he began his
search for support for his calculation center in the early 1930s.
General Electric had a research branch that was a leader in applied
mathematics, but it decided to keep most of its work in-house rather
than make any large investments in Bush\'s center. Paralleling General
Electric\'s reaction, Western Electric and Bell Laboratories were
willing to supply critical parts for the Rockefeller Analyser and to
give advice on the type of tools and services mathematicians desired.
But they did not offer major financial support to Bush\'s 1930s
projects.

\(U) The Eastman-Kodak Corporation of the 1930s was not as generous with
MIT as its founder had been, but it remained a very good friend of the
Institute. Of even greater importance to the nation was Bush\'s
relationship with a corporation that did not have a reputation for
research. Why Bush became so close to a compa

top cr:om:T//ooMiNTOncL to uoa, auo, oan, odr and nzu/xi



TOP 6ECRET/rfCOMINT//REL TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR and MZU/X1

ny that made cash registers is explained by Bush\'s friendship with the
famous team of Colonel Edward A. Deeds and Charles Boss Kettering. That
friendship linked National Cash Register, MIT, the NDRC, and the Ultra
secret.70

\(U) Bush first came in contact with Deeds and Kettering through the
institutions of American science. Bush and Deeds served on important
advisory committees that steered aeronautical research in the United
States, such as the precursor to NASA, the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics. In 1931 Deeds consented to serve as chairman of the
board of National Cash Register (NCR).

\(U) For someone trying to rebuild NCR, the best opportunities were those
that demanded a technology not found in the corporation\'s offerings of
the 1920s. NCR needed new machines to move deeper into information
processing. Inventory, retail sales, and personnel management, for
example, had demands met only by devices that had some sort of
large-scale memory. The failure to create offerings to compete with IBM
was one reason for the demand for a thorough shake-up at National Cash
Register in 1936.

\(U) While Deeds slashed expenditures in many parts of the company, he
increased allocations for research. He pushed the efforts to move NCR
into the electrified bank-posting and billing machine business, and he
looked forward to finding a technology to challenge IBM\'s grip on
automated file management. Previously, Deeds had applauded NCR\'s very
quiet acquisition of the rights to a fantastic machine for the era, the
Hofgaard relay computer.71 Both the 1930 and 1938 NCR relay computer
patent applications cited a machine with an architecture quite like that
of the modern serial computer. It had a central processing unit and
addressed storage. It performed at least three of the four basic
arithmetic functions and had the ability to calculate, store, and print
totals and subtotals for many different items. Although Hofgaard\'s
machine was quite

promising, Deeds ordered NCR\'s research director, Harry N. Williams, to
drop the project and investigate other technological options. Deeds was
probably advised to do so by Vannevar Bush, who was aware of the
Hofgaard patents and who had just completed his survey of computing
technologies.72 Bush advised a jump into electronics. The men at NCR
learned much about the progress of electronics and film-optical
combinations in scientific measurement from Bush. They were certainly
interested in the MIT work on smaller and more reliable tubes because of
the value of low power and fast miniature tubes for machine design.73
Their positive reaction to the operation at MIT resulted in an
endorsement of Bush\'s suggestion to use the Institute as a resource for
NCR.

\(U) The Navy Comes in Second

\(U) After all the disappointing appeals to the foundations and the
troubled negotiations with the navy, Bush finally gained a pliable and
generous sponsor. Bush turned to Deeds requesting money for the proposed
universal electronic computer, the revolutionary Rapid Arithmetical
Machine. Explaining that it was still on paper, but underscoring that
other work had already led to the building of successful electronic
circuits, Bush was able to get Deeds\'s attention.74 The first
discussion about the electronic computer may have started with hints
that MIT could immediately build an electronic calculator for NCR But
the beleaguered Rockefeller project led Caldwell and Bush to scale down
their ambitions. Bush, already very busy, had a limited role in the
Rapid Arithmetical project. He restricted himself to writing overviews
of its architecture. Like the other projects at the institute, the Rapid
Arithmetical Machine fell behind schedule.

\(U) Despite his patience and Caldwell\'s promises, Deeds could not leave
the future of his company in the hands of an academic institution.
Following Bush\'s suggestion, NCR established its own electronics
research laboratory in the spring


top gFPPFT\</rnMiMT»pci m iiqa aiic, r am, naD Ann \>m iiyi



of 1938,75 headed by Joseph Desch. Desch and his few assistants taught
themselves about the latest electronic developments.76 He completed an
electronic digital calculator by 1940 and explored the application of
electronics to many types of business machines.77

\(U) Joseph Desch

(Courtesy of the NCR

Archive at the Montgomery

County, Ohio, Historical Society)

::: {style="width: 24.85299882399059%;"}
:::

\(U) Then just as Desch\'s work was leading to the construction of
hardware, the crisis in Europe and Deeds\'s patriotism ended Desch\'s
commercial projects. His expertise in electronics and, as important, his
unique manufacturing abilities, attracted the attention of the men in
Weaver\'s group at the National Defense Research Committee. Before the
end of 1940, Desch became part of the rise of Big Science. Within
another year, he became central to the history of Bush\'s Comparator and
to OP-20-G\'s future.

\(U) Notes

1\. (U) Karl L. Wildes and Nilo A. Iindgren, A Century of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at MIT, 1882-1982 (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1985), 7- Samuel C. Prescott, When MIT Was Boston Tech, 1861-1916
(Cambridge: Technology Press of MIT, 1954).

2\. (U) James M. Nyce and Paul Kahn (ed.), From Memex to Hypertext:
Vannevar Bush and the Mind\'s Machine (Boston: Academic Press, 1991).

3\. (U) Larry Owens, \"Straight Thinking: Vannevar Bush and the Culture
ofAmerican Engineering,\" (Ph.D. Thesis, Princeton University, 1987).
Larry Owens, \"Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyser: The Text and
Context of an Early Computer,\" Technology and Culture 27(1986): 63-95.
Montgomery B. Meigs, \"Managing Uncertainty: Vannevar Bush, James B.
Conant and the Development of the Atomic Bomb, 1940-45,\" (Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1982). Stanley Goldberg, \"Inventing a
Climate of Opinion: Vannevar Bush and the Decision to Build the Bomb,\"
ISIS 83 (1992): 429. G. Pascal Zachary, \"Vannevar Bush Backs the
Bomb,\" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 48 (1992): 24.

4\. (U) James M. Nyce and Paul Kahn (ed.), From Memex to Hypertext:
Vannevar Bush and the Mind\'s Machine (Boston: Academic Press, 1991),
235-353, especially, Linda C.Smith, \"Memex as an Image of Potentiality
Revisited,\" 261-286. Adele Goldberg (ed.), A History of Personal
Workstations (Reading, Mass.: ACM Press, 1988). On Bush\'s science
policies in the post-WWII era, Daniel J. Kevles\'s preface to Vannevar
Bush, Science: The Endless Frontier (Washington: NSF, circa 1992), ix.

5\. (U) Bush\'s patent history was traced through the historical files at
the U.S. Patent Office\'s Crystal City, Virginia, facility.

6\. (U) Bernard Williams, \"Computing With Electricity,
i935-i945,\"(Ph.D. Thesis, University of Kansas, 1984), 48.

7\. (U) Otto J. Scott, The Creative Ordeal: The Story of Raytheon (New
York: Atheneum Press,

1974)

8\. (U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action. NDRC and its successor, the
OSRD, were very elitist and Big Science oriented. James Phinney Baxter,
Scientists Against Time (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1968), and Irvin
Stewart, Organizing Scientific Research for War: The Administrative
History of the Office of Scientific Research and Development (Boston:
Little-Brown, 1948).

9\. (U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action.




TOP QCOnnV/QOMlNTy/rcCL TO UCA, AUG, CAM, GBR m\* HZUM

10\. (U) Larry Owens, \"Straight Thinking: Vannevar Bush and the Culture
of American Engineering,\" 289-90,

11\. (U) An overview of the results of his attempts, from the 1930s to
the postwar era is found in MIT Archives, AC4 Boxes 30 and 36, Center of
Analysis.

12\. (U) Vannevar Bush, \"Instrumental Analysis,\" Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 42 (October, 1936): 649. Karl L.Wildes
and Nilo A. Lindgren, A Century of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at MIT, 1882-1982,230-3.

13\. (U) Smithsonian History of Computers Interviews, \"Gordon S.
Brown,\" January 27, 1970, provides a fascinating overview of many of
the efforts at the Institute in the 1920s and 1930s.

14\. (U) There were several companies that made similar devices for gun
control systems for the military, however. See the Barber-Coleman and
Hannibal Ford companies. Note that Ford was interested in building
aversion of an analyser and, perhaps, donating it to Cornell University.
See press releases by the Sperry Corporation, \"Hannibal Ford,\" \"Ford
Instrument Company.\" On Ford and Bush, Rockefeller Archives, RG12.1
Diaries of Warren Weaver, March 3,1935.

15\. (U) We have yet to have a technical history of the \"tab\" era that
shows how they were used, but general overviews of needs and demand are
found in James R. Beniger, The Control Revolution (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1986), and in the brilliant Martin
Campbell-Kelley, \"Industrial Assurance and Large-scale Data
Processing,\" Technohistory of Electrical Information Technology
(Munchen: Deutsches Museum, 1991).

16\. (U) Irene S. Farkas-Conn, From Documentation to Information Science
(New York: Greenwood Press, 1990).

17\. (U) Larry Owens, \"Straight Thinking: Vannevar Bush and the Culture
of American Engineering,\" 78. A valuable insight into the new Analyzer
project is Charles Babbage Institute, Interview by William Aspray with
Dr. Frank M. Verzuh, February 20 and 24,1984

18\. (U) Bush\'s acceptance of digital calculation, as evidenced by the
plans for the electronic calcula

tor, the Selector, and the Comparator, calls into the question the
thesis that he was wedded to analog models and calculation. See Larry
Owens, \"Vannevar Bush and the Differential Analyser: The Text and
Context of an Early Computer,\" Technology and Culture 27(1986): 63-95.

19\. (U) NSA RAM File, Hooper toOP-20-G, \"Cryptanalytic Machines,\"
September 26, 1930, and Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell
Hooper, Box 18, Hooper to Secret Naval Board, \"Staff Corps Personnel,\"
February 7,1936.

20\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper,
\"Memorandum on Johns Hopkins Group Visit,\" November 3,1937, Box 17,

21\. (U) Rockefeller Archives RG12.1, Diaries of Warren Weaver, \"Visit
of Hooper and Dammon,\" June 10,1938.

22\. (U) Wheeler, Yankee from the West, 18-20, 386, and Farago, The Game
of the Foxes, 477-8.

23\. (U) The ONR became a blessing to the universities after World War II
when it replaced the NDRC to subsidize research until the National
Science Foundation was created. Harvey M. Sapolsky, Science and the
Navy; The History of the Office of Naval Research (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1990). The ONR is put into perspective in
Thomas A Guniston and Roger L. Geiger (ed.), Research and Higher
Education: The United Kingdom and the United States (Buckingham: Open
University Press, 1989), 3-17.

24\. (U) Paolo E.Coletta (ed.), The American Secretaries of the Navy,
Vol. Ill, 1913-72 (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1980), 663, dates
the height of the conflict in 1933-34- But Harvey M. Sapolsky,
\"Academic Science and the Military: The Years Since World War II,\" in
Nathan Reingold (ed.), The Sciences in the American Context (Washington:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1979), 379\"399\> describes a longer
battle.

25\. (U) Harold G, Bowen, Ships, Machinery and Mossbacks: The
Autobiography of a Naval Engineer (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1954), 119-20.

26\. (U) Ibid, 45. Bowen\'s role in the evolution of the ONR is traced in
Harvey M. Sapolsky, Science and the Navy: The History of the Office of
Naval


TOP SECRiTttCOMlMTJ/REl TO USA, AUS, CAM, GBR AMD HZL//X1



Research (Princeton: Princeton University Press,

1990).

27\. (U) NARA RG457: SRH-150 \"Birthday of the Naval Security Group\";
SRH-305, \"The Undeclared War: History ofRI,\" byLaurance Safford;
SRMN084 \"Evolution of the Navy\'s Cryptologic Organization;\" and
SRH-152 \"Historical Review of OP-20-G, 17 February 1944.\"

28\. (U) David Kahn, \"Pearl Harbor and the Inadequacy of
Cryptanalysis,\" Cryptologia 15(1991):

274

29\. (U) Louis Kruh, \"Tales ofYardley: Some

Sidelights to His Career,\" Cryptologia 13(1989): 327-356. NARA RG457,
SRMD-018 \"Mexican Intercept Messages 1912-1924 MI-8.\" (U) NSA CCH
Series XI K, Sam Snyder, draft of proposed history \"Machines in U. S.
Cryptology Before World War II,\" 27 June 1975- (U) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, \"Memoranda on SIS, Formation of Cryptanalytic Group\" from CCH
Series XI K, Box 13, circa 1929

1939

30\. (U) More and more cases of important \"acquisitions\" during the
1920s and 1930s are coming to light. See Parker, Pearl Harbor Revisited:
United States Navy Communications Intelligence, 1924-1941, 12.

31\. (U) Interviews and correspondence with Waldron S. MacDonald,
1987-91. MacDonald stated that Bush was the one that convinced the navy
to investigate highspeed devices. It is more than likely that Bush was
in touch with Hooper before 1930 about such matters. See also Library of
Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper, Box 21, August 17,1945,
\"Rough Draft of Comment,\" 3.

32\. (U) A useful history of the introduction of these machines is NARA
RG457, SRH-004, \"The Friedman Lectures on Cryptology.\"

33\. (U) Deavours and Kruh, Machine Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis, 212, 218. NARA RG457, \"The Undeclared War: The History
of RI,\" 15 November, 1943, by Laurance F. Stafford, Captain, U.S. Navy,
and SRH-355, \"Naval SecurityGroup History to World War II,\" 161. A
History of Communications Intelligence in the United States With
Emphasis on the United States Navy (NCVA), 12. A wonderful insight in
OP-20-G\'s methods is in

Lt. L.F. Safford, \"The Functions and Duties of the Cryptologic Section,
Naval Communications,\" Cryptologia, 16 (1992): 265-281.

34\. (U) NSA RAM File, Hooper toOP-20-G, \"Cryptanalytic Machines,\"
September 26,1930.

35\. (U) A book that overstates the case against the historical
importance of formal analysis but which is still useful is Nigel West,
The SIGINT Secrets: The Signals Intelligence War, 1900 to Today,
Including the Persecution ofGordon Welchman (New York: 1986). Avery
revealing and important document for the history of OP-20-G and American
cryptanalysis is found in Louis Kruh, \"Why Was Safford Pessimistic
about Breaking the German Enigma Cipher Machine in 1942?\" Cryptologia
14 (1990): 253.

36\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War
II,\" 80. C. A. Deavours, \"The Black Chamber: A Column: LaMethode Des
Baton,\" Cryptologia 4(1980): 240-247.

37\. (U) Hooper\'s power to do this may have been based on the
connections he established earlier in his career when he was the head of
the Bureau of Engineering\'s new radio-sound division.

38\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War
II,\" 80. U.S. NavyOffice of Information, Biographies Branch, 13
February 1958, \"R. Adm. J. N. Wenger, USN, Ret.\"

39\. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Chief of Naval Operations,
\"Cryptanalytic Machines Photocells,\" November 11,1931.

40\. (U) Photoelectric sensing for \"sorting\" has a long and complex
history. See, for example, the patents of Michael Maul of Berlin dating
from at least 1927 which were assigned to IBM. See U.S. patents
2000403-4. A Westinghouse engineer created an optical card sorter that
caught Hooper\'s interest, Electronics 3 (October, 1931), 157. The 1930s
work of the German, Emanuel Goldberg, who also invented the microdot,
became of great significance to Bush\'s plans after World War II.
Michael K. Buckland, \"Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document Retrieval,
and Vannevar Bush\'s Memex,\" JASIS 43 (1992): 284.

41\. (U) Among Hooper\'s and Wenger\'s recommendations was the
exploration of the new statistical-mathematical techniques being used in
the




TOP 6ECnET//COMIMT//nCL TO UGA, AUG, OAN, ODR anJ NHJX1

advanced sciences. Although professional mathematicians were not brought
into 0P-20-G until the onset of World War II (such as Howard Engstrom,
Andy Gleason, and Marshall Hall), at least the younger men at OP-20-G
were sent back to school for classes in statistics in the mid-iQ30s.
NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War IT,\"
268. The influence of Lester Hill during the prewar years remains to be
traced.

42\. (U) By the early 1930s, some scientists were using tabulating
machines for advanced calculating. G.W. Baehne (ed.), Practical
Applications of the Punched Carxi Methods in Colleges and Universities
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1935) gives an insight to some of
the uses and some of the special devices attached to the tabulators.
Also useful for an understanding of precomputer calculation are William
Aspray (ed.), Computing Before Computers (Ames, Iowa: Iowa State
University Press, 1990), and Arthur Norberg, \"High Technology
Calculation in the Early 20th Century: Punched Card Machinery in
Business and Government,\" Technology and Culture 31 (1990): 753.

43\. (U) NSA RAM File, McClaran to Director of Naval Communications\',
January 7,1932. NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to
World War II,\" 75. The code was put into operation in December of 1930
and, luckily for the Americans, used until late 1938.

44\. (U) The pressures onOP-20-G multiplied because of a bizarre
occurrence in 1930-31. The former head of the State Department\'s and
Signal Corps\' cryptanalytic agency, Herbert Yardley, published his
infamous book, The American Black Chamber.lt revealed the United
States\' ability to read various Japanese code and, perhaps, cipher
systems. NARA RG457» SRH-151, \"Military Study: Communication
Intelligence Research Activities,\" 9.

45- (U) NSA RAM File, \"McClaran to Director of Naval Communications,\"
January 7,1932.

46\. (U) NSA RAM File, Huckins to Bureau of Engineering, \"IBM Rental,\"
May 15,1933.

47\. (U) Deavours and Kruh, Machine. Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis, 212. Hooper was especially worried about Britain\'s new
shipboard cipher machines in the early 1930s. NSA

RAM File, Hooper to OP-20-G, \"Cryptanalytic Machines,\" September
26,1930.

48\. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-084, \"The Evolution of the Navy\'s Cryptologic
Organization,\" and SRH-264, \"A Lecture on Communications
Intelligence,\" by Capt. J. N. Wenger, USN, August 14, 1946.\"

49\. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-151, \"Military Study: Communication
Intelligence Research Activities,\" 008.

50\. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-083, \"Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,
January 1938.\"

51\. (U) Howeth, History of Communications Electronics in the United
States Navy; With an Introduction by Chester W. Nimitz, 538.

52\. (U) John C. Walter, \"William Harrison Standley,\" in Robert William
Love, Jr. (ed.), The Chiefs ofNaval Operations (Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1980), 93.

53- (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, \"Naval Security Group History to World War
11,\" 99.

54\. (U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action (New York: Morrow, 1970),
71, and Library\* of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper, Box
16, \"Binaural Sons of the C,\" June 1,1934. One of Hooper\'s most
valuable connections with the scientific elite was the \"alumni\" club
for those who had worked at the two major sonar development sites during
World War I. He quite possibly met with Bush in its informal context. He
certainly had later contacts with Bush when they were both associated
with the NACA. MIT was a major training resource of the navy during WWI,
and it had the Pratt School of Naval Architecture. Karl L. Wildes and
Nilo A. Lindgren, A Century of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at MIT, 1882-198 2 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985), 393.

55\. (U) NSA was unable to provide copies of the four Bush reports and
the rest of files on Bush\'s work for the navy in the 1930s. As will be
discussed, the later four general reports were for the design of the
machine that became known as the Comparator. Bush\'s initial report to
Hooper and Wenger was probably much more general and was most likely
concerned with very broad issues of communications technology. Bush\'s
oral history version of the negoti

Page30




ations does not quite fit with other evidence, MIT Archives MC143 ma to
116.

56\. (U) A useful long-term view of academic-military relations is Henry
Etzkowitz, \"The Making of An Entrepreneurial University: The Traffic
Among MIT, Industry, and the Military, 1860-1960,\" E. Mendelsohn,
etal., (ed.), Science, Technology, and the Military 12 (1988): 524.

57\. (U) Ronald W. Clark, The Man Who Broke Purple: The Life ofthe
World\'s Greatest Cryptologist, Colonel William F. Friedman (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1977).

58\. (C) David P. Mowry, \"Listening to the Rum Runners,\" Cryptologic
Quarterly, 2 (1983), 27-50.

59\. ity- Friedman seems to have found away to make sure that Yardley
would be unable to join the new army group. NSA CCH Series XII Z,
\"Memorandum on SIS, Formation of Cryptanalytic Group\" from CCH Series
XI K, Box 13, circa 19291939. David P. Mowry, \"Listening to the Rum
Runners.\"

60\. (U) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, draft of proposed history
\"Machines in U.S. Cryptology Before World War II,\" 27 June 1975.

61\. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, William F. Friedman, \"Addenda on the IBM
Sorter,\" circa August 1935

62\. -(€)■ NSA CCH Series XII Z, William F. Friedman, \"Invention of a
Cryptanalytic Coincidence Counter,\" Signals Intelligence Section, 14
April 1937. NSA CCH Series XII Z,William F.Friedman, \"Description ofthe
General Principles of an Invention for Locating Idiomorphs and Isomorphs
in Cryptanalysis,\" 14 April 1937.

63\. (U) Robert F. Kohler, Partners in Science: Foundations and the
Natural Sciences, 1900-1945 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1991). Robert F. Kohler, \"The Ph.D. Machine: Building on the Collegiate
Base,\" ISIS 81 (1990): 638-662.

64\. (U) Robert F. Kohler, Foundations and the Natural Scientists,
1900-1945. Roger L. Geiger, To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of American
Research Universities, 1900-1940 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1986).

65\. (U) Larry Owens, \"Straight Thinking,\" 78-79.

66\. (U) Rockefeller Archives, RG12.1, Diaries of Warren Weaver: May
1,1940 \"Atanasoff Visit\"; October 24, 1939, \"Tour of Computing
Centers\"; \"Visit to Boston,\" October 29,1939; October 5,1939,
\"Howard Aiken Visit\"; May 24, 1939, \"Visits of Harrison and
Caldwell\"; and January 1,1939, \"Visit to MIT.\"

67\. (U) Daniel J.Kevles, The Physicists: The History ofthe Scientific
Community in Modern America (New York: Knopf, 1978), 296.

68\. (U) An important article on the history of both mechanical and
electric-electronic fire control devices is A. Ben Clymer\'s, \"The
Mechanical Analog Computers of Hannibal Ford and William Newell,\"
Annals ofthe History of Computing 15 (1993): 19-34.

69\. (U) Carroll Pursell, \"Science Agencies in World War II: The OSRD
and Its Challengers,\" in Nathan Reingold (ed.), The Sciences in the
American Context: New Perspectives, 359.

70\. (U) On Deeds, Isaac F. Marcossen, Wherever Men Trade (New York:
Dodd-Meade, 1948), and Colonel Deeds: Industrial Builder (New York:
1947).

71\. (U) Copies of his patents were located in Bush\'s files at the
Library of Congress.

72\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers ofVannevar Bush. Bush had copies of
various Hofgaard patents in his papers.

73- (U) There is no evidence on whether or not Bush and Deeds knew that
IBM was beginning to explore electronic calculation, but they must have
been aware, because of patent claims, of IBM\'s growing interest in
microfilm and allied devices, including a \"statistical\" machine.
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand Trial
Records, Chronological File, March 1937, letters re: visit of Green and
Sullivan to MIT to view electronic work.

74\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library-, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand Trial Records, May 19, 1938, Bush to Deeds \"Center of
Analysis.\" A general overview of the machine and project is in Brian
Randell (ed.), The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers, 3rd
ed., 294, and Bernard Williams, \"Computing With Electricity,
1935-1945,\" (Ph.D. Thesis, University of Kansas, 1984), 137-170.

TOP SEGnCTV/GOMHHTOREL TO USA, AUS, PAN, QRR ftMD NZUJ.Y.1




75\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library\', Accession Records, Deposition of
Joseph Desch; Electronics Research that Bush asked if he wanted a job at
NCR. Honeywell v Sperry Rand Trial Records \"Report of Joseph Desch on
Electronics Laboratory to H.N. Williams.\" August 16, 1938, Eugene
Kniess, \"First Lab Rediscovered,\" NCR Dayton 6(1973): t-3.

76\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell
vSperry-Rand Trial Records, Desch Deposition, \"Report of Joseph Desch
on Electronics Laboratory to H. N. Williams,\" August 16, 1938.

77\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell
vSperry-Rand Trial Records, Desch Deposition, and Reports of April
28,1939 and March 25, 1940. Smithsonian Interviews with Desch and Mumma.

Page 32 IW bbLKhlllLUMIWIiiKfcL IU UbA, AUb, IAN, UbK ANU HZLJIAI


top ocorcrn/ooMiNTOmiL to uoa, auc, can, gbr amp nzu;xi

