Chapter 9 (U) Wandering into Trouble

\(U) A Cryptanalytic Future

TflS) Although OP-20-G and the SIS were frustrated by the delays in
their Atlas and Abner computer projects, 1948 began as a year of
continued triumph for American communications intelligence. The
cryptologic systems of the major powers were being read, and COMENT
seemed about to supply America\'s leaders with the type of high-level
information that had won \"G\" and the SIS so many accolades in World
War II.

Q¥&) Most of Stanford C. Hooper\'s dreams seemed to have been realized.
The army and navy COMINT organizations had some professional
mathematicians, they were starting vibrant new RAM programs, and they
even had \"scientific\" advisory boards. The future of advanced
cryptanalysis was bright, as was the future of American intelligence in
general.

(¥&} Most important, the Cold War, it seemed, was to be a cryptanalytic
one. A few foreign systems carrying high-level messages would yield to
mathematics and computers and provide the kind of information needed to
predict and, perhaps, counter the actions of the political and military
leaders of all the important nations. There was even cryptanalytic
progress against internal enemies. Old diplomatic messages were giving
what was needed to find and break up Soviet espionage rings within the
United States. There was hope that further works would lead to entries
into all current Eastern bloc diplomatic and clandestine systems.

TO Cryptanalytic success would not be expensive. Direction finding as
well as the very labor-intensive traffic and plain language analyses
would play secondary roles. America\'s COMINT agencies would not have to
build a

costly communications system to speed massive amounts of data to
processing centers because high-level cryptanalysis provided lead time.
Cracking important systems would give insight into the grand intentions
of the world\'s political and military leaders, and that would give
American policy makers time to formulate measured responses.

TTSD The belief that cryptanalysis would be the heart of SIGINTs future
was reflected in the kind of machines the army and navy developed during
the immediate postwar years. They focused on general-purpose computers
for cryptanalysis, not ones for massive data processing.

\(U) The Worst of Times

(TS//S\*j Then the heroic cryptanalytic assumption was suddenly
undermined! In spring 1948 the SIGINT agencies had to rethink their
purpose and place in America\'s intelligence establishment. The
Americans and their intelligence partner, the British, were being locked
out of the world\'s most important code and cipher systems just as the
Cold War became dangerous. Three years after the end of the war, the
Soviets closed down their old high-level systems and replaced them with
ciphers that could not be penetrated. Soon the Chinese revised their
superencryptions, making them quite sturdy. Even the strengthened their
machines and proce

dures.

CTS//SIj A series of very significant intelligence failures came after
the cryptanalytic blackout. That put American SIGINTs future in
jeopardy. The Soviets\' A-Bomb, the Berlin Blockade, the forming of the
satellite bloc in Eastern Europe, the fall of China, and the Korean War
were not predicted.


P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)



T6P §ECRE\'l/ieUMINI//KbL USA, AUS, IAN QBH AND NZU/X1

\"TflS\^-Asthe Soviets increased their strategic military capabilities,
the situation became critical. U.S. leaders demanded another Ultra and
Magic. But the new organizations created to coordinate COMINT, the Armed
Forces Security Agency (AFSA) and then the National Security Agency
(NSA), were unable to replay World War II\'s COMINT history. Their
cryptanalysts faced challenges much, much more difficult than Purple or
the Enigma. The new code and cipher systems were so strong that it
seemed that Hooper\'s faith in mathematics, science, and computers had
been misplaced.

(T0//0I) The worth ofSIGENT, especially cryptanalysis, came into
question by the early 1950s. Many came to believe that cryptology had
improved so much that cryptanalysis was a lost cause. The situation grew
threatening: NSA was almost confined to performing menial intelligence
tasks as the Central Intelligence Agency used a new techno-miracle, the
U2 and its amazing cameras, to physically penetrate Soviet Russia.1

ing center than a \"cryptanalytic\" center.3 That caused NSA to search
for high-speed substitutes for the best data processors of the era,
tabulating equipment.

(TS//SI) Those who kept their faith in the powers of mathematical
cryptanalysis sought a different type of computer, a
super-numbercruncher. At the same time, more practical cryptanalysts
began a search for special-purpose computers (SPDs), ones so fast that
even brute force cryptanalytic attacks would allow identification of
hoped-for weaknesses of the new machines of the Russians and their
allies.

(TS//SI) The search for \"busts\" turned out to be a formidable
challenge with a strange technological twist. Identifying \"bust\"
conditions was demanding, but putting what was found to use was a
greater and more complex chore. Because the \"busts\" did not produce
statements of intentions, only anew type of automated intelligence
\"factory\" could turn the chaos of millions of \"small facts\" into
valuable information.

£ny/0f) Even those who continued to believe that another Ultra might
emerge lost faith in the National Security Agency and its ability to
develop its own techno-miracles. As a result, through much of the 1950s
and 1960s, there were initiatives demanding the creation of an
alternative relationship between science and SIGINT. America seemed
poised to give a new generation ofthe likes ofVannevar Bush and John von
Neumann enormous amounts of money and complete power over cryptanalytic
research and policy. The United States came close to establishing a
Manhattan Project for the cryptanalysis of Soviet systems, one which was
to be staffed and led by academics, not professional codebreakers.2

(T0//0I) The intransigence ofthe Soviets\' systems also had consequences
for computer policy. On one hand, as NSA was forced to rely upon
noncryptanalytic sources for its \"intelligence,\" the Agency became as
much or more a data process

-(S\^-Although the resulting emphasis on automated data processing
brought NSA\'s computer needs closer to those ofthe private sector, the
Agency could not rely upon the market place to supply what it needed.
Whether the requirement was for analytic or data processing devices, NSA
had to do much more than select hardware from the shelves of computer
manufacturers.

\(U) A computer industry had begun to emerge in the 1950s, and it matured
in the next decade, but it was not meeting NSA\'s needs. Even the giant
and wealthy IBM was unwilling to provide what NSA required without a
great deal of coaxing. As a result, NSA had to \"interfere\" in the
marketplace.

\(U) No permanent and satisfactory relationship between the corporations
and SIGINT was created, however. NSA functioned in an unpredictable and
many times uncontrollable world.





The computer industry was so unstable that \"G\'s\" captive corporation,
ERA, was saved only by the willingness of a larger corporation to absorb
it. Then politics forced an end to the special relationship with it that
Wenger had worked so hard to establish.

■fS) NSA was left adrift. It could not afford its own computer
manufacturing facilities, and it did not have a cooperative and
permanent corporate partner.

(TS//SI) That made it very difficult for the Agency during the mid-1950s
when it attempted to overcome the technological advantage of Soviet
cryptology. Based on an intense faith that new machines would work
cryptanalytic and data processing miracles, NSA became involved in many
projects to create new generations of computer technology.

£6} Those projects were not always successful. Hopes were often far
ahead of technology and of the organizational and research abilities in
the computer industry. In several instances the incompatibility of
NSA\'s technological needs and those of the market place led the
Agency\'s contractors astray. Delays, cost overruns, and less than
perfect machines became familiar. At least one involvement, NOMAD, was
an embarrassing failure.

machines so fast that its demanding attacks on Soviet cipher systems
would become practical.

£TS//0fl The attempts led to advances in computer technology and to new
generations of special-purpose, architecturally innovative RAMs. The new
RAMs (SPDs) were arguably the most powerful computers in the world. But
even without the challenge ofthe Soviet enciphering machines, NSA would
have become one ofthe major users and sponsors of computers. By the
early 1960s, NSA\'s \"basement\" became one ofthe world\'s great
computer data processing centers. But the drive to find a cryptanalytic
solution to meet the Soviet threat was the driving force behind the
Agency\'s great commitments to advancing computer technology.

\(U) The Magic Continues

(TS//SI) The World War II alliance ofthe United States, England, and
Soviet Russia was based on convenience, not basic trust. As a result, in
midwar America and England began intercepting Soviet radio traffic and
diplomatic telegraph messages. The end ofthe war saw an increase in the
attention paid to the Soviets. Great Britain and the United States
signed the historic BRUSA agreement for SIGINT cooperation and
intensified their joint work on Soviet and related systems.4

(TS//SI) But the Cold War was so dependent upon intelligence gathering
that NSA and its allies were forgiven for most ofthe shortfalls. The
need for information, combined with the memory of Ultra and Magic, led
to more than absolution for not up-to-the-mark research and development
projects. Despite some earlier developmental missteps, NSA was granted
massive support for its efforts to reenter the Soviets\' higher level
cryptosystems. In the mid-1950s, NSA became entangled in one ofthe great
techno-gambles in American history: it shunted tens of millions of
dollars to computer companies hoping to develop

-fTO//3f) There was some astounding cryptanalytic progress, and by late
1946 there were indications that four ofthe most important Soviet civil
and military systems could be exploited. There were also indications
that its one-time-pad diplomatic and clandestine systems might be
breached.

(T0//DI) The reach ofthe BRUSA successes was astounding. The British and
Americans were breaking into not just one, but several different types
of enciphering machines and systems. While a team at the SIS began its
three decadeslong Venona project on Soviet diplomatic/clan




\^9 33(hX2)

destine messages, the British and then the American cryptanalysts
attacked the Russian Longfellowf

ML

::: {style="width: 38.745098039215684%;"}
:::

TKJ//6\*) There was hone that the greatest prize of all, the\| jnachine,
might soon be

penetrated. No one was sure if it was a cousin of an Enigma or a Soviet
version of the American ECM, but it seemed clear that carried

the type of messages that had gained such glory for World War II\'s
cryptanalysis.

GES//Q¥? Devoting almost one-half of \"G\'s\" and the SIS\'s resources
to the Soviet problem was, both inescapable and wise.7 The Venona work
began to pay off. It was discovered, through endless rounds of tabulator
processing, that during the war the Soviets had reused some of their
onetime pads. Finding

led to

many readable messages. As the names of atomic and other spies appeared
from the decrypts of the mid-1940s messages, there was hope that a
similar effort would allow the postwar Soviet diplomatic communications
to be read.

\^3S8//ST) But the Venona victories were not complete; only a percentage
of intercepted Soviet traffic was decrypted, and \"scientific\"
cryptanalysis played a limited role. Many of the penetrations came as a
result of information provided by prisoners of war and documents and
devices retrieved from Germany.8 Others were the result of something
less than pure cryptanalysis; in the 1940s the Soviets had yet to
perfect their cryptosecurity procedures. But traditional cryptanalysis
did contribute, and by 1947 exploitation was more the result of machine
analysis rather than operator errors and procedural weaknesses.9

(TS//8i\> There were more successes. The Americans joined the British
codebreakers in profitable attacks on a host of Soviet hand ciphers

and code systems. And the ciphers of most other natifitis wprp
vulnprahlp psp\^nially those generatedbyl

(TQ//0I) In 1947-8 GC&CS, \"G,\"arid the SIS appeared to be able to
conquk any target10 The codes of both Chinas were opening and those of
..all the minor nations of the world were\'penetrable. In addition, the
attack against the! \~l cryptosystems gave the United States a great
deal of information about the Third World.

for much of their traffic. Somevyhat later, Japan\'s reintroduction of
the Purple machine to generate one-time pads for its diplomats .proved
quite useful to America\'s SIGINT monitors. And the nations that
continued to use the Enigma gave some of Joseph Desch\'s Bombes; ond
life.11

a productive sec

(TS//SI) At the same time, England and America were tapping the surge of
Soviet plain language transmissions, reading commercial codes and
ciphers, and using undecryptable messages for traffic analysis. By 1948;
OP-20-G alone was intercepting more than 1,000,000 Soviet plain-language
messages a year.; Some of that material was quite valuable because, for
example, Soviet military production and deployments could be inferred
from the communications concerning industrial orders and military
logistics.12

(TG//SI) Plaintext analysis contributed much, but cipher breaking was
the hallmark of \"G\" and the SIS during the first postwar years.

\(U) At Last, the Electronic Bombe -Perhaps

(T3//3I) In early 1948 the emerging command over the Soviet cipher
systems was so promising that the Americans decided to invest in two
innovative and large-scale, special-purpose electronic computers. They
would I exploit the penetrations into the important Soviet Longfellow I
Their corn




£03.3{h)(2) W%. 86-36


bined price tag equaled the cost of one-fourth of OP-20-G\'s World War
II Bombes.

tS) Athird of arnillion dollars was committed to Pluto, an electronic
machine built by Sylvania, the Boston electronics firm that was helping
with the constrtiction of MIT\'s Whirlwind computer. Pluto used twenty
six-fp6t by twenty-foot frames crammed with vacuum tubes. Those walls of
tubes and circuits were heeded to test regular and

iLohgfellow and other devices. Pluto ran through 1,000,000 settings a
minute and was so precious that only a handful of the most trusted
codebreakers were informed of its existence,

was turned to analyzing the sometimes-friendly nations

of

»3

(T3//SI) Much more ambitious was Hiawatha. In late 1947 electronic
potentials finally came together with a cryptanalytic opportunity to
force the release of massive funding for the long-sought Electronic
Super Bombe. The elusive electronic matrix finally seemed ready, and at
the same time enough had been learned about Longfellow to think that a
bombe would allow continuous reading of its messages. A huge amount for
the time, \$1,000,000, was promised, and it was made clear that more
would come if the development of the new and aptly named \"Hiawatha\"
machine demanded it.

(TG//SI) OP-20-G ordered its favored contractor, ERA, to put its best
men to work. In March 1948 a team was formed and the longawaited machine
was begun. The attack on Longfellow was thought to be just a prelude to
reading the rest of Russia\'s most valuable communications. The Cold
War, it seemed, was to have its own Ultra.

(T0//0I) Then, on April 11, 1948, the Soviets took Hiawatha\'s target
off the air. The reaction in America was immediate. The huge electronic
Hiawatha project at ERA was cancelled.14 A score of small relay analogs
of Longfellow became useless. Sylvania was told to complete Pluto, but
it

(TS//6I) The bright young mathematician of World War IPs OP-20-G who had
remained on as one of the few civilians at\"G,\" Howard Campaigne, was
furious with the Americans as well as the Soviets. When he learned that
ERA\'s electronic bombe project was terminated, he wrote:16 \"If we had
complete coverage \[of Longfellow\] from the beginning \[1943\] we
probably could have been reading their communications by 1945. If we had
supported this by the analytic machinery recently planned, we could have
broken out most of the available traffic. The entire story is one
of\'too little too late\'. This system was in use for five years, yet we
were not ready to read it in quantity until it disappeared.\"

(T6//SI) Campaigne would become distraught. Much, much worse was
happening. Perhaps because of an American defector, by 1949 all of the
four major Soviet cipher systems that the United States and England had
penetrated were taken off the air.

(TS//SI) They were replaced by new machines\* ones too fresh and too
protected to be unraveled through operator errors or clandestine
activities. There seemed little hope of a repeat of the 1930s when Japan
sent messages on old and new systems at the same time or when a midnight
visit to a consular office by the ONI could produce a code book or
insights into highest level systems.

(TS//8I) The Soviet problem was not the only frustration, nor the only
danger to the survival of what became NSA. By late I949I \~\|began to
tighten its cryptoprocedures, locking out the British and Americans. By
1952\] \|had done

so much to protect its codes and ciphers that NSA worried that it would
be permanently barred

from some of the most important sources it had

17

on developments if 17 Even the

Chinese Communists were replacing their simple additive and
transposition codes. They began




EO 3.3(h)(2) P. L: 86-36


borrowing much from the Soviets\' rugged onetime-pad systems. The North
Koreans soon followed their mentor\'s lead.18 .

\(U) Without Magic and without Many Friends

(T6//0I) The crypto crises of the late 1940s came when COMINT was losing
many of its friends and its independence. Even before \"Black Friday,\"
when the Soviet systems were changed, there had been calls for reform,
usually motivated by a search for efficiency. By the early 1950s NSA was
alone, under scrutiny, and threatened.

(TO//OI) Soon after World War II, the SIS and OP-20-G were ordered to
cooperate on the allocation of targets and the design and purchase of
machines. Then in a general cleansing of military inefficiencies, the
army and navy SIGINT agencies were locked together in 1949 to become the
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA). Unfortunately, the merger did not
go well and caused many problems. Almost as soon as it was born, AFSA
was criticized because it could not reenter the high-level systems and,
most significantly, because it missed predicting the outbreak of the
Korean War! Combined with previous oversights, such as failing to spot
the emergence of the Soviet atomic capability, the Korean oversight put
centralized SIGINT in danger.

fflS//OfrAFSA and American intelligence in general received a scathing
review by the Brownell Committee as early as 1950. More than

the organizational structure came under fire. Faith in cryptanalysis was
plummeting, so much so that insiders later called the early 1950s the
\"Dark Ages of American Cryptanalysis.\"

gTC//9i) The formation of the National Security Agency in 1952 did not
reverse the cryptanalysts\' fortunes. Results remained meager and
SIGINTs reputation suffered. If there had been viable alternatives, such
as penetration of Soviet systems by human agents, NSA might have become
a minor player in the intelligence field. Necessity and a powerful
director saved it. But the Agency was never secure in the 1950s.

(G} Although NSA\'s tough and effective new leader, General Ralph
Canine, hinted that NSA might soon be able to \"listen into the
conversations of the Polit Bureau,\" and was able to secure budgets that
allocated \$5,000,000 or more dollars a year for regular analytical
equipment, NSA was not left to itself. \"\"

(TS//SI) A year after its birth, NSA was subjected to a series of
threatening investigations by powerful review boards. As soon as one
examination was concluded, another began. While some, such as the Hoover
Commission, held that breaking the Soviet ciphers was of paramount
importance, all the evaluations voiced a deep disappointment that an
Ultra had not been re-created.

CSS//O\*) As a result, there were calls for a thorough overhaul of
SIGINT. Even some of NSA\'s very best friends, such as William O. Baker,
thought the Agency should be stripped of the responsibility of solving
major cryptanalytic systems.

CES//8ID The SIGINTers had to prove their worth. Their only hope was for
a technological and scientific \"fix.\" Even if they had to continue to
rely upon plaintext intercepts and T/A new machines and methods were
essential. Code and cipher breaking needed a technological revolu




tion as well as mathematical breakthroughs. And NSA needed help to
achieve both.

\(U) Unfortunately, it had to pull itself up by its own bootstraps. The
American computer industry was too immature to supply what was needed,
and Big Science was paying little attention to cryptanalysis.

\(U) The End of an ERA

(TS//SI) In the late 1940s, as the Soviets shut down their major systems
and when American SIGENT critically needed technological and scientific
help, one of \"G\'s\" most valuable allies, ERA almost disappeared.
Then, after ERA\'s rescue, it did not return to the role of the always
ready and infinitely flexible partner that Hooper, Wenger, and Engstrom
had envisioned.

\(U) By as early as 1949, Engineering Research Associates (ERA) was
experiencing internal problems and it was becoming a political target.
The challenge of turning science into a business was difficult for the
company. In St. Paul and Washington internal conflicts were developing.
In addition, ERA\'s status as a favored captive corporation came under
increasing fire as the Cold War began to turn computers and applied
science into competitive industries.

\(U) By 1950, Wenger\'s dream of having a devoted and responsive research
and development firm, whose talents ranged from advanced mathematics to
computer design, was lost. At a critical point, America\'s SIGINT
organizations were left without their own \"think tank\" and without a
computer company devoted to its needs.

\(U) But in 1947, as ERA was taking shape, it seemed as if it would
become a permanent multipurpose research and development arm of \"G.\"
It had some of the world\'s most skilled electronics engineers and even
a leading mathematician cryptanalyst, C. B. Tompkins. Tompkins had a

unique mission. He was intent upon creating a high-level mathematical
research branch within the company. It would fill, he thought, the
vacuum left when most of the mathematicians in\"G\" and the SIS returned
to academia and noncryptologic investigations.

\(U) Howard Engstrom had a longer agenda. He hoped that ERA would become
the new embodiment of the Desch-NCML RAM-building combination that had
been so creative and responsive during the war. But Tompkins and
Engstrom realized that to survive, ERA had to take on more than what was
offered by OP-20-G and, perhaps, the SIS.

\(U) At the company\'s birth, that did not seem threatening. Joseph
Wenger thought that ERA\'s special relationship with \"G\" would always
induce the company to bow to SIGINT needs. But ERA\'s dual role quickly
entangled it in a series of conflicts no one had foreseen. Then the
creation of AFSA began to undermine the other side of the relationship -
that ERA could always expect a steady flow of contracts from the SIGINT
community.

\(U) As the early Cold War\'s demands began to pile up on ERA \"G\'s\"
assignments and the company\'s private work came into open conflict. The
conflicts with the Bureau of Ships and some internal frictions were not
the result of avarice or greed. In large measure they came about because
of lack of support for applied science before the Cold War created the
science \"industry\" of the 1950s. ERA began its life on a financial
shoestring. It had little working capital and, for a time, survived only
because the Bureau agreed to pay it as stages of projects were
completed.

\(U) ERA also began with a fear that the navy\'s work would be unable to
sustain it. Each of the founding members was urged to search for other
projects. That search developed its own dynamic, and by the end of 1947
the navy\'s contracts

\\





accounted for less than one-half of ERA\'s business.

\(U) Although that share varied from year to year, ERA soon had a life of
its own and developed many outside ties and obligations. It joined with
the National Bureau of Standards in the search for a commercially viable
electronic computer; it gained a prestige contract from the ONR to
survey all computer logic and technology; it had contracts with the
atomic energy agencies; it was developing civil air control systems; and
one of its divisions was designing sanitary trucks for airports. ERA
even signed an agreement to develop a magnetic drum computer for IBM.21
ERA\'s financial guru, John Parker, had to sternly remind all the ERA
men that \"G\'s\" work was and would remain the company\'s first
priority.

\(U) Throughout 1948 and 1949 the Bureau of Ships kept up the demands for
an end to the special relationship between OP-20-G and ERA. The Bureau
was ready to take further steps.22

\(U) The pressures compounded the problems ERA faced as its managers
tried to turn a group of ex-academics and very creative engineers into
businessmen. There were internal disagreements about ERA\'s place in
science and arguments also developed over which projects to support.
ERA\'s founders began to drift apart. By late 1949 C. B. Tompkins
departed for a more stable environment: the NBS\'s West Coast applied
mathematics center. Almost as soon as he arrived he began lobbying for
the creation of a special nonprofit mathematics \"think tank\" for
cryptanalysis, one separate from ERA.

\(U) He was not the only one to find ERA inhospitable. Key engineers were
leaving to find positions in the emerging commercial electronic computer
industry. One of the first men to go was John Howard. One of the reasons
for his departure was ERA\'s rather ill-fated attempt to revive Bush\'s
Rapid Selector.

\(U) Howard was soon followed by other ERA founders. Even Laurance
Safford, who retired and became a consultant on statistical work, stayed
at ERA for only a few months. He found one of NSA\'s new friends, the
MELPAR engineering company, more attractive.

\(U) ERA\'s Traumas

\(U) The grand hopes for ERA in 1946 had turned into frustration for its
engineers, as well as for its managers by the late 1940s. They never
imagined that defense and civilian work would come into conflict. ERA\'s
attempt to build a new Rapid Selector became a technological, financial,
and managerial nightmare. The engineers could not make military
technology work in a practical civilian setting, they could not please
their defense and academic customers at the same time, and the Selector
project became an economic sinkhole for the company.

\(U) The resulting tension was intolerable to many at ERA John Howard
decided to leave in the summer of 1948. His role in what had become a
chaotic and perhaps hopelessly over-budget project made it difficult for
him to stay. He drifted for a time, but became an important member of
the team the Burroughs Corporation put together to lead it into the
computer business. Ralph Meader left quite soon. John Coombs lasted a
bit longer, then decided to join IBM\'s engineering staff.

\(U) Financial pressures played a great role in the troubles at
Engineering Research during the late 1940s. It became increasingly
difficult for the ex-academics and scientists to keep their small
company competitive as more firms began to compete in the expanding
military and sciencerelated computer markets. 23

\(U) In addition to the financial pressure, the drive for efficiency that
came with the integration of the communications intelligence agencies
also took its toll. Soon the AFSA demanded contrac





tors who knew how to follow bureaucratic procedures and who could
survive on low-margin government contracts. Although Joseph Wenger
remained in the highest levels of AFSA and NSA and was influential in
forming their technical and research policies, he could not protect
ERA\'s old special relationship. \*\*

\(U) The technology politics of the Cold War also played a role. In 1950,
just as ERA\'s leaders were searching for a financial sponsor to rescue
them, they received a body blow from Drew Pearson. In his \"Washington
Merry-Go-Round\" column,25 his men exposed the special relationship
between ERA and the navy. The criticism led the navy to take a harder
look at the company and to tell the intelligence agencies to return to
the bureaucratic way of doing business. The navy\'s auditors, angered
over the special open-end contracts with ERA, paid such meticulous
attention to ERA\'s internal accounts that bad feelings developed on
both sides.

(TS//SI) The navy threatened to terminate much of the vital secret work
at ERA just as the Soviet crisis was calling for more, not less,
cooperation. ERA\'s president, John Parker, let loose some verbal blasts
that further eroded the necessary 26 trust between the navy and the
company. Relations with the navy bureaus soured so much that Joseph
Wenger was unable to arrange for either a ceremony for or a letter of
special thanks to the ERA engineers who had designed and built the
astounding Atlas computer. IBM\'s men did receive formal thanks for
their new work, however.27

fFS) The reorganization of American SIGINT, leading to the creation of
the AFSA in 1949, then the NSA in 1952, contributed to the demise of the
special relationship between ERA and the codebreakers. The integration
of the military agencies brought a shift in who made decisions about
computer purchasing. Because of the personnel policies that had led the
SIS to look to civilians while \"G\" favored the military, NSA inherited
a \"com

puter\" staff predominantly composed of those from the army side of
technical SIGINT. They had different ties and orientations than the few
remaining old navy hands that worked at policy levels, such as Joe
Eachus and .lames Pendergrass. Unlike them, the 1950s NSA computer group
had grown up within the Agency, had a deep respect for IBM and its
equipment, and were more \"operational\" than mathematical
cryptanalysts. As a result, the new core NSA group did not protest when
the special group that integrated Agency and ERA work was disbanded. The
1954 termination of the NCML in St. Paul went almost unnoticed.

\(U) SIGINT Loses Another Friend

CTS//3I) The impact of the frictions with the bureau and the
disillusionment caused by \"Black Friday\" were not confined to Wenger
and the crew at ERA. At the end of his life, Stanford C. Hooper was
disappointed about what had happened to the company, to American COMINT,
and to his fight for science and innovation. In particular, his
relationship with Engineering Research Associates did not end happily.
Because of his views on how the navy should organize research for the
Cold War and his ties to ERA, the navy\'s bureaucracy turned on the man
who had done so much to modernize naval communications and
cryptanalysis.

\(U) Once retired, Hooper continued to serve on many science-related
military boards, and his previous contributions to electronics led to
more civilian accolades. At the same time, he began to act as a
consultant to several small but important electronics firms.28 He also
remained in contact with the SIGINT agencies. As late as 1952 he was
asked to serve on an important NSA advisory panel on communications.29

\(U) Hooper became frightened of big business and discouraged by its
attitude toward the needs of the military. He felt betrayed by those he
and the navy and the nation had done so much for.




top oconcTOooMHm/ncL uoa, auo, uah odr ahd nzu/mi

Hewas especially hurt by the actions of the company that he had helped
to establish at the end of World War I, RCA

\(U) Hooper also worried that his old friends, the academics, would not
serve the cause of SIGINT. He was alienated by their attempts to stake
claims to a major share of military research funding and their demands
for avast and centralized postwar federal agency to mimic the NDRC.

\(U) The military bureaucracy received even more barbed criticism from
Hooper. Sadly, he received some in return. The navy\'s bureaus managed a
direct slap at him. In the early 1950s, near the end of his life, he had
to undergo a demeaning questioning of his integrity because of Ms
relationship with ERA.30

\(U) In 1947 Hooper\'s ties to ERA\'s operations became direct when he
was asked to provide the kind of guidance he was giving to several other
small electronics companies. His arms-length role in ERA was formalized
in 1949 when the company agreed to pay him \$3,000 a year to act as a
\"technical\" consultant,

\(U) The relationship pleased everyone until ERA was purchased by the
giant RemingtonRand Corporation. Remington had decided to enter the
computer business and to do so before it could be locked out by its
competitor, IBM. In the early 1950s, Remington strengthened its old
electronic research group, purchased the Eckert and Mauchly company and
the rights to its UNIVAC business-oriented computer, and then bought ERA
Remington valued the cash-hungry ERA for its scientific computer designs
and its patent rights on magnetic drums and other critical components.
The ERA purchase made those who had retained ERA stock quite a profit,
but Remington did not follow through on its chance to remain the
world\'s leading computer manufacturer. Policy decisions, including ones
holding back technological innovations, led many industry observers to
characterize the firm as one that

was able to \"snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.\"

\(U) Hooper had opposed the purchase of ERA by Remington Rand because he
wanted ERA to remain flexible and focused on the needs of the
intelligence community. Eventually, Hooper accepted the Remington
purchase because there seemed no other financial alternative and because
he thought that the link to Remington might have another important
bonus. Being tied to Remington, he wrote, would ease the navy auditors\'
pressures on ERA Sadly, with the takeover, the navy intensified its
reviews of ERA, and it began to question Hooper\'s connection.

\(U) Remington was ordered to show that Hooper had played a \"technical\"
role. Remington could not muster the evidence necessary to show that
Hooper had played a technical role. Asa result, in 1954 Remington was
notified that Hooper had not been and was not a legitimate employee of
ERA Therefore, declared the navy\'s attorneys, none of the payments to
him could be charged to government contracts.3\* That decision came just
a year before Hooper passed away.

\(U) An Old Friend\'s Burdens

\(U) As ERA and Stanford Hooper began to face their disappointments,
another \"G\" oldtimer was burdened with the responsibility of trying to
rescue the fortunes of American cryptanalysis. The navy\'s Earl Stone,
who had been a senior administrator in OP-20-G since World War II, was
asked to head the new Armed Forces Security Agency. He accepted what
became a very trying job. He had to supervise the bureaucratic merger of
the two services, the SIS and \"G,\" and, at the same time, rescue
high-level SIGINT.

(TS//Gfi That was too much to ask. Despite the help of the \"greats\" of
American codebreaking, such asRowlett, Kullback, Sinkov, Rosen, Eachus,
Campaigne, and even William Friedman, Stone ended his tenure in mid-1951
without





meeting the Soviet cryptanalytic challenge and without solving the
problem of how to secure science\'s and industry\'s help in rescuing
American codebreaking.

::: {style="width: 31.76470588235294%;"}
:::

\(U) Frank Rawlett

::: {style="width: 32.0%;"}
:::

\(U) Dr. Abraham Sinkov

ff¥\$ But he had made some progress. With advice from Joseph Wenger who,
although ill, continued to be a major figure in the SIGINT
organizations,32 Stone was able to do more than just fend off attacks on
his agency. He convinced

America\'s politicians that SIGINT funding should be increased and that
previous levels of research and machine development be continued. And he
encouraged the expansion of methodological and technical research
branches in the agency. Before he left, ten percent ofAFSA\'s workforce
was engaged in some research activity, and the number of outside
consultants, such as the mathematicians Marshall Hall and C. B.
Tompkins, was increased.

\(U) Stone was able to continue AFSA\'s role in exploring exciting, new
technological frontiers. The agency invested in transistor development,
and Stone encouraged the pathbreaking and very eliciting explorations by
\"G\'s\" navy engineer, M. Scott Blois, into thin-film memory
technologies. That work was a grandfather of microelectronics.

fFS}The research climate under Stone was so open that the ideas of a
young Korean War era sailor, Dudley Buck, were financed. AFSA began
experiments on extremely low temperature and ultrafast \"cryotron\"
circuits in its laboratories.33

(T8//SI5\" Stone supported mathematical as well as technological
research. As he was ending his reign, there was an attempt to build a
formal program to attract the brightest and best of the nation\'s young
mathematicians to the agency.34 And Stone carried forward the
\"scientific\" advisory groups that Joseph Wenger had begun after the
war. Driven to find solutions to the Soviet problem, he established the
Special Cryptologic Advisory Group (SCAG) and brought in men like Howard
Engstrom and John von Neumann, who, he thought, would link AFSA to the
cutting edge ideas in industry and academia. They were to serve another
function. A friendly review board with a luminary such as William F.
Friedman acting as liaison might protect the agency from those who
thought AFSA should turn the Soviet problem over to an independent and
\"truly scientific\" organization.35





(T0//3I) Many of the members of the early advisory groups were recruited
from the ranks of those who had served cryptanalysis then returned to
industry, such as Joe Desch,36 John Howard, Ralph Palmer, and IBM\'s
John C. McPherson. Or they were old friends such as C. B. Tompkins and
Marshall Hall, who had gone back to academic life. Although they were
all agency connected, they had at least become \"outsiders\" with
broader contacts than those within the agency.

(T0//0F) And in the early 1950s, the ties of the science board to
industry were acceptable. The direct link between industry and SIGINT
provided by SCAG was seen as an invaluable benefit to the agency. Only
later would questions of conflict of interest arise. That impelled NSA
to seek more of its advisors, the likes of Claude Shannon and S. S.
Cairns, from academia.37

(€) Stone did more than forge abridge to industry and science. He was
able to secure budgets that gave the agency as much money each year for
the purchase, rental, or development of computers and other analytic
equipment as had been spent on all cryptomachines during the first two
years of World War II.38

(T8//0I) But Stone\'s years were marked by emergencies and cryptanalytic
failures. Many of the ideas for advances in cryptanalytic computers had
to be put aside as the agency desperately tried to reenter the Soviets\'
most important cryptosystems and to adjust to having to become one of
the world\'s mightiest data collection and processing facilities.

\(U) A Desperate Search for \"Depth\"

(TS//SI) Before the Soviet blackout in 194849, the navy and army
cryptanalytic groups had focused on the development of general-purpose
cryptanalytic machines, such as Goldberg, Sled, Connie, and the 5202.
The work on the electronic computers, Atlas and Abel, was an extension
of the search for advanced and universal cryptana

lytic engines. A few costly limited-purpose machines such as Warlock
were designed, and there was some discussion of finding a replacement
for the tabulators for data handling.39 But until 1949 the army and navy
engineers emphasized finding a way to automate the most sophisticated
general cryptotechniques.

\(U) Then priorities had to shift. Old development programs, such as
those for Atlas and Abel, were allowed to continue, but dollars were
shifted into creating simple but ultrafast comparators and into a tragic
project to create a data machine as powerful as 400 tabulators.

CTS//SI) In 1949 the emphasis was put on machines to \"get the job
done\" rather than on creating elegant technological innovations. The
central job of the early 1950s machines for the critical Soviet problem
was to sift through millions of intercepts, hoping to find any hint as
to how the cipher systems might possibly be attacked. The search for
\"depths\" was the function of a new series of comparators.

fPS} Machines were not required for complex mathematical analyses but to
find errors in procedures or weaknesses in cipher equipment designs. The
devices did not have to be very intelligent, nor did they have to be
multipurpose. But they had to be fast - fast enough to perform massive
searches.

CF8//3I) No machine in AFSA or anywhere else was up to the challenges of
1949. To search through less than a single week\'s traffic from the one
important Soviet system that had remained on the air, Albatross, would
have called for 166,000 hours on the World War 1170mm Comparator. Even
the advanced 5202 comparator was much too slow.40 A new series of
comparators had to be created, and quickly.

(T0//0I) In early 1950 ERA was told to rush the design and manufacture
of a machine that would be able to search a day\'s worth of Albatross


top ocennv/ooMiNT/mEL uca, auo, gan odr ahd mui



traffic in one week. The group in St. Paul put other projects on hold as
it tried to meet the goal. Two machines were hurriedly put together in
four months, then shipped to Washington. They were called Robins because
they performed the round robin attack. Their speed was impressive
although they reached only one-third of the rate that had been
requested.

(T6//SI) By looping two punched paper tapes, with one ten characters
shorter than the other, and running them at thirty miles an hour past an
improved photoelectric reader, 5,000 characters a second were read, and
ten characters at a time were tested for simple IC coincidences. Because
one tape loop was shorter than the other, the machine never had to stop
or mechanically shift a tape. The improved electronic counters and
circuits signaled when a threshold had been reached and punched an IBM
card with identifications of the positions of the tapes without stopping
the machine.

(TG//0I) The first two Robins impressed the \"cryppies.\" Solomon
Kullback wanted forty of them, but financial constraints led to ERA
being told to manufacture only a dozen copies, but as soon as possible.
ERA worked some manufacturing miracles. Within a year fifteen Robins
were running two shifts a day in Washington. That continued for half a
decade as one million Albatross messages were run against each other.
The result was tragic, however. Only 138 \"busts\" were located, and
Albatross remained unexploitable.41

(T3//3I) The Robins were only the first of a string of 1950s specialized
comparators fast enough for the job of seeking the weaknesses in the
tough cryptosystems. Every advanced technology was explored. When time
allowed, some of the new machines were given complex architectures that
provided flexibility. But speed was the goal. The 1950s comparators
were, at the very minimum, three hundred times faster than the NCR-Gray
Comparator of World War II. Several

different companies contributed to this series of Comparator variations.

IgStfSf) In fact, by the early 1950s, the comparator initiative shifted
away from ERA and the old navy group within the agency. The army\'s
cryptotechnicians and AFSA\'s contractors guided developments after the
first Robins had been delivered.

(TS//SI) But even before \"Black Friday\'s\" full impact, the army group
had begun its own new comparator project. It called on its old friend
Technitrol to put delay lines and magnetic tapes together to create the
late 1940s generation of all-purpose comparators. But what had been
planned as a long-term project for a series of ever more powerful
machines turned into a rather hurried production of variations of more
simple round-robin IC searchers. They were needed to meet the Soviet and
new The results were impressive, Ciceros proved valuable for

however. The more than a decade and advanced the technology of magnetic
tapes and their drive mechanisms. They also demonstrated how multiple
memories could speed processing.

42

(TO//81) Another high-speed, delay-line and tape depth searcher was
Delia. It could make 10,000,000 simple tests a second and compare 1,000
messages at all positions in seventeen hours.43 Technitrol\'s Vivian
series, which was

was to

designed to help on include a machine with a magnetic core memory, one
of the first use? of that technology, but that was abandoned as
tbo/time-consuming.

(T0//0I) To rusjh/ delivery of a machine that could perform a parity
bias attack, one of the Vivians was constructed by a new friend of the
Agency, Denver Research. It was also asked to construct the important
transistorized successors to Hecate, \| \~1crib machine. Those two

Murdocks cost NSA three quarters of a million

EO 3.3(h)(2) P.L. 86-36





dollars.44 Another small company was called on in the 1950s for an
ambitious project for a machine for locating and tallying group
coincidences. An improved Connie that cost more than \$650,000 was built
by National Union Radio.45

(TQ//QI) Perhaps the most impressive of the new comparators was Duchess,
another machine that was intended to be part of a long-term program. It
was designed to tackle additive-pad problems to hopefully point to key
reuse. It replaced the interim machines Countess, Mistress, and Consort.
They had been too slow to re-create anew Venona-like triumph.46

(TS//SI) Completed by IBM in the mid1950s, Duchess contained several
magnetic drums, helping it to perform as many as 1,000,000 subtractions,
weightings, and threshold tests an hour. It cost over \$700,000, but
that seemed a bargain if it could conquer any of the frustrating
one-time-pad systems used by the Soviets and their allies.

GES//SJ9 Unfortunately, the new comparators were not providing immediate
solutions. The Soviet machine and high-level hand systems remained
impenetrable, and the wisely used proved as stubborn. Plain text

and T/A and the tiny \"facts\" that came from lower level systems were
what was yielding information to AFSA and NSA, but the agencies were
becoming overwhelmed by all those disparate \"facts.\"

\(U) Earl Stone listened to the complaints of his machine staff, then
gave them the signal to begin a project that had a very, very grand
objective: to build/ one ultrafast data machine that would be more
powerful than the hundreds of tabulators the agency was operating.

\(U) His decision to launch the Nomad project led to \"the\*\' great
defeat among NSA\'s early computer efforts. Millions of dollars went for
nothing because of the chaos in the American computer

P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)

industry and because of the cryptocrisis of the early 1950s.

\(U) Wanderers and Nomads and Chaos

(T9//3I) Vannevar Bush had not been alone in hoping for a machine to
replace the electromechanical tabulator. As soon as World War II ended,
OP-20-G used some Monogram funds to explore the logic of high-speed
sorting, one of the most important functions in cryptanalysis and data
handling.47 Soon, an SIS team joined in to try to establish the logical
basis for replacing the punch card.48 Despite great hopes, it was
realized that while the technology for mathematical machines such as
Atlas was at the threshold, the hardware demanded by a data manipulation
revolution was something for the future.

\$\*\$■ ERA\'s mathematicians continued their investigations of sorting,
dispelling worries about losing data when it wandered around during
sorts, but that was about all that was accomplished in the early stages
of what came to be called the Nomad Project.49

fS\^-The \"memory\" problem had defeated the first stages of Nomad. In
1948 file technologies, such as magnetic tapes, appeared to have too
many problems to be overcome, even for IBM\'s team led by Ralph Palmer.
Printers to keep up with electronic data machines were also in a distant
and very expensive future.50

•{S} As a result, the early Nomad goal of a data computer 1,000 times
more powerful than a tabulator or sorter was turned into nothing more
than a rather speculative design project at ERA Its engineers laid out
apian for an electronic computer that concentrated on sorting,
collating, and other data handling tasks. Their Nomad was to have
magnetic drums and some other highspeed memory to act as servers for a
huge magnetic tape system, PIT. It was to hold the equivalent of
2,000,000 IBM cards. That PIT tape system was divided into four units,
each of which


TOP SEITRET//CQMINTOREL UCA, AUG, PAN ODR AND NZUfXI


IUP Sbl\'Kbl»U)MINI))NbL USA, AUS, LAN 6BR AWP NZU/XI

would deliver data to the computer\'s processor automatically. In
addition to the data handling and sorting features, Nomad was to have a
set of basic cryptanalytic orders and a special architecture to speed
their execution.

fTO//SI) Howard Campaigne and the others at \"G\" who were overseeing
the project realized how speculative it was. They knew the Nomad concept
was for the future. Even if they obtained the help of other government
agencies, the machines\' development would cost \$5,000,000 and take
seven years.51 That was too much time and money, and Nomad began to
wither. Some attempt was made to begin detail designs, but ERA became
too busy with its emergency projects.

(TS//SI) Then, another life for Nomad seemed possible. A preliminary
research agreement was made with the NBS and the air force in mid-1949.
A young navy engineer was sent to the NBS to work on the first stages of
machine design.52 Not much came of those explorations, however. The
tapes and their drives continued to be stubborn and the cost of such a
machine seemed prohibitive.53

\(U) The idea seemed to be laid to a final rest, but in 1950 the crisis
at AFSA led Earl Stone to agree to find the millions necessary to create
a data processing revolution. If his staff, led by those from the SIS
side of the agency, succeeded, AFSA would be the first in the world to
have a massive data computer.

\(U) The designs from ERA were dusted off and updated, and a request for
a proposal was publicized in 1950. The proposal specified functions to
be performed rather than hardware, but everyone knew that the mass
memory demands would call for very advanced tape systems. After a year,
a contract was signed. It was the largest single computer contract the
SIGINT agencies had let since the Bombe project.

\(U) The cost of the proposed machine was high but acceptable, especially
to those who had lost faith in a heroic cryptanalytic future for SIGINT.
The overwhelming processing demands that centralized noncryptanalytic
\"intelligence\" would require could be met only with new and
revolutionary input and file technologies.

(T6//SI) There already was a need for such a technological revolution,
and it was reaching a critical level. The amount of data reaching the
Agency grew exponentially. By 1955 there was a torrent
of\'noninformation\" flowing into NSA The United States had more than
2,000 roundthe-clock listening positions that were sending thirty-seven
TONS of intercept material to NSA each month. In addition, some
30,000,000 words of intercept were sent by teletype.54

(TS//SI) The data overload grew with every year and every Soviet
challenge. NSA\'s posts were intercepting 2,000,000 messages a month
from just one Soviet system, and the vast majority of that was plain
text. And NSA\'s T/A section was processing more than 3,000,000,000
groups a year.55 Within a short time, punching 1,000,000 IBM cards a
month for just one problem was common. By the late 1950s the Soviet/ \|

broblem alone was generating 15,000

magnetic tapes per month.

(T577S£ The other nations of the world were contributing their share.
China generated 250,000 enciphered messages a year, matching the number
of coded intercepts from the rest of the world. Plaintext numbers were
much greater.56

\(U) All that data had to be changed into a useful, if not standard,
format, examined for relevance, sorted and merged, and routed to the
analysts who attempted toturri the minute bits of data into
intelligence. Even in the early 1950s the burden was becoming tod much
for hand and tabulator processing. NSA could not hire and train

P.L. 86-36 EO 3.3(h)(2)




IUH bblKbllilUIVIINUmeL USA, AUS, CAW QDR AND HZU/X1

enough people, and electromechanical machinery seemed unable to meet the
challenge.57

\(U) The risky gamble on Nomad seemed inescapable. The system was to cost
at least as much as six or seven Atlas or Abner computers and would
probably make the company that created it the world\'s leader in the
manufacture of computers that were able to match the needs of business
and bureaucracy. Although the Nomad design emphasized somewhat
special-purpose sorting and data manipulation, the chance it provided to
create new mass memory systems was very attractive.

\(U) The Nomad contract was a great prize, and in some ways more
important to the computer industry than the massive Sage early-warning
computer project that IBM was taking on.58

\(U) If You Can\'t Trust Someone from the Adams Family, Then \...

\(U) Surprisingly, the late 1951 letter of intent for the huge data
machine did not go to ERA, or even IBM, but to Raytheon, the company
that had caused the army such frustration during the design and
construction of Abner. Because of its earlier Nomad design work, ERA was
the logical choice for the great project. But the emergence of AFSA\'s
bureaucracy, the earlier political tussles that had weakened the special
relationship with ERA and its being in the process of total absorption
into Remington-Rand made it a noncontender.

(TS//SI) In fact, ERA was already being pushed to the side by its new
owner and the SIGLNT community. Only one major new AFSA or NSA computer
contract was awarded to ERA until later in the decade.59 Luckily, just
after the Nomad award, the navy gave RemingtonRand/ERA a contract to
develop a computer using the exciting and revolutionary new transistor
in place of tubes. That would have a later

impact on NSA\'s computer and communications capabilities.60

\(U) The other likely winner of the contract, IBM, apparently did not
make a serious attempt to take on Nomad. Although very worried by the
UNP/AC computer, IBM\'s upper management was hesitant about putting too
much effort into electronics. In addition, its own magnetic tape project
faced continuing difficulties, and there were worries that government
contracts would lead to the company\'s patents being threatened. IBM had
a tradition of doing everything possible to protect itself.

\(U) One tactic was to perform enough work on a technology before taking
a contract to prevent developments financed by federal contracts from
undermining patent claims. There may have been another reason. IBM had
an overflowing plate. The computer advocates within the company had used
the Korean crisis as leverage to convince Tom Watson to allow them to
design and build the special NORC computer for the Naval Ordnance
laboratory and, in a separate project, to create the Defense Calculator
(IBM 701) to sell to agencies such as the AEC and NSA All that taxed
IBM\'s engineering staff and made the company\'s management quite
worried about wasting men and money on additional speculative
projects.61

\(U) Raytheon was not awarded the Nomad contract by simple default,
however.62 The company had become well known and respected. And it was
connected to New England\'s financial and industrial community. Its
chief executive was of the famous presidential, intellectual Adams
family. And its staff seemed worthy of the trust that had to go with a
cost plus fixed-fee contract. The tape drives they had developed for
Abner and the glowing reputation of its lead engineers made AFSA\'s team
think they had selected the best firm. In addition, Raytheon\'s proposal
was strong enough to allow a waiver of the usual requirement that a
government agency accept the lowest bid.


TOP SCCRCTttCOMIHT/mCL USA, AUS, CAM QBR AMD NZU/X1


TOP SEeRCT/ZCOMIHTORCL UCA, AUG, CAM fSBP fthin M7I ffY1

-(Tgr) Raytheon\'s plan was very attractive. It met all the demands of
the ERA\'s plans. Raytheon\'s machine was to have a large central
memory. It was to provide fast access to 180,000,000 characters, about
the amount of data that 2,300,000 IBM cards could hold. An innovative
basic \"stack\" architecture was to speed data access by avoiding the
need to determine and specify addresses. The central computer used
vacuum tubes, but its speed was enhanced by having a thirty-six-bit word
transferred and worked on in parallel.63 Raytheon chose a threeaddress
instruction to make memory fetches rapid. However, because of the
special orientation of Nomad, the ultrafast main memory was limited to
1,024 words.

£¥8) Raytheon proposed to use glass delay lines for the main and fast
buffer memories and a special three-inch tape for the PIT system. The
tape system was very challenging. The vacuum column component that made
stopping and starting tapes safe, as well as fast, and that would win so
many sales for IBM, was yet to be invented.64 Raytheon had experimented
with many ways to reduce the start/stop time for the tapes and to
minimize the debilitating strain on them. One pragmatic and unique part
of their solution was a proposal to read and write on the tapes in both
directions. Another was a special laminated tape that could handle
stress and also serve as part of the tape drives\' essential clutch
system. The tapes had a layer of mylar, then a layer of metal, then a
layer of mylar with oxide coating.65

(T0//0I) The company promised to use innovative, pulse-position fast
circuitry and to include a set of instructions tailored toAFSA\'s needs.
They were to make sorting, collating, and modular arithmetic quite rapid
and easy to program.\" But Nomad was not to be a special cryptanalytic
machine. Streaming units and the like were left to Sled and Abner.

\(U) Work on Nomad began in late 1951 with generous expenditures of
manpower and money.

The AFSA stood ready to write a \$1,000,000 check for the initial work
and expected to send a similar amount to Waltham for each of the next
three years or more. Although the agency knew Raytheon was working at
the edge of computer technology, it thought its stable but innovative
engineering team would conquer any problems.

\(U) Very soon, however, AFSA\'s men sensed their expectations were not
going to be met. They were correct. The Nomad project quickly became a
demonstration of how little AFSA-NSA could depend on outsiders.
Everything from management and technology to attitudes turned Nomad into
a project nightmare.

\(U) Some of the problems may have been due to the AFSA\'s shifting
requirements and its acceptance of promises that major technological
leaps could be achieved at minimal cost. Others were the result of the
difficulty of attempting to do secret work in a corporate setting. But
most of the problems were the price of the disorder in the computer
industry of the 1950s.

(TS//SI) Raytheon had begun to organize its project team and to explore
its technological options well before the final contract for Nomad was
signed in May 1952. Raytheon\'s best and brightest were assigned to the
work. They received help from friends ofSIGINT such as Dudley Buck and
continuing advice from ERA Unfortunately, ERA continued to refine and
modify its designs, doing so into 1953.67 The design changes made it
difficult for Raytheon to begin the actual construction process and led
to demands for increased payments for the machine.

\(U) Some of the attempts to make Nomad a beyond-the-state-of-art machine
created delays. The decision to use magnetic cores rather than
delay-lines for the fast memories led to some dead-end explorations; the
work on pulse-position circuitry ate up months; complex circuits to
check and recheck the validity of data flows were





designed, then abandoned as too expensive; and then it began to be
realized that the acronym \"PIT\' had become a much too accurate
description of the magnetic tape development project.

\(U) NSA had not closely supervised the Raytheon group, partially because
the Agency was too short-handed to be able to assign a permanent
overseer to Waltham. Thus, when hints of problems reached Washington
during the project\'s first year, they did not cause alarm. By mid1953
the technical and managerial difficulties were obvious, however. NSA
teams began to visit the Raytheon site; then a rather typical Cold War
problem almost brought the project to a complete halt

(T6//3f) Naval security discovered that the wife of one of the lead
Nomad engineers had relatives who were in powerful positions in the
Chinese Communist Party, and the engineer still had close relatives
living in China. His clearance was revoked.68

(TS//SI) At almost the same time, Raytheon encountered some financial
problems. That led to a greater role for its accounting department in
the Nomad project. The company could no longer afford to subsidize any
part of the work. Then the accountants declared that Raytheon deserved
much more than the government had expected to pay. The NSA\'s Nomad
sponsors became outraged over that and the delays in the project. There
was a diplomatic but very pointed request that Raytheon\'s \"big brass\"
come to Washington for a review of the situation.

(TB//0I) The attempts by Raytheon\'s CEO, C. F. Adams, to calm NSA
during his Washington visit, did not suffice. A formal review of the
project was conducted, and a report was made to NSA\'s director. That
report and the discussions among the Agency\'s computer experts led to a
recommendation that an excuse be found to cancel the contract and bring
the PIT work to Washington. In mid-1954 it was announced that
Raytheon\'s Nomad had fallen too far below the technological curve to be
worthwhile.70

(T0//0I) A prototype of PIT was shipped to NSA, and a large final check
was sent to Massachusetts. A later accounting indicated that the
prototype, the only lasting contribution of the Nomad project, had cost
NSA \$3,250,000.n

\(U) Failure upon Failure

(T6//6I) In 1954 NSA was left without its grand \"data\" machine, and
Raytheon went in search of an ally to underwrite its sagging computer
effort.72 The company found a sponsor, the Honeywell Corporation, but
NSA was left adrift with a great deal of worry that the Nomad failure
would make it impossible for the Agency to mount any more grand computer
efforts. NSA was failing in its assault against its important target,
and it had failed in its greatest computer effort.

\(U) A great deal of faith in the Agency and in technology was needed.

Notes

EES//SI) Just as that was being arranged, the chief engineers at the
company had a serious falling out. At the end of the year, several
resigned, taking much of the talent in the company with them.69 That
truly worried those in NSA who were responsible for Nomad. The anxiety
turned into anger when Raytheon requested prepayments to continue the
work.

i.ffS//Sij NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"NSASAB Meeting,\" 19-20 May i960.

2\. CEC//flfr NSA AHA ACC 46406, \"Recommendation for a Full-Scale Attack
on Russian High Level Systems,\" 2 May 1956.

3\. (8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ware on NSASAB Mathematics Panel, 9 January
1967.

4.-fT0//8ft NSA CCH Series XIT Z, draft copies of Michael L. Peterson,
\"The Bourbon Problem.\"




1P.L. 86-36 !E0 3.3(h)(2)


(T0//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, S-2733, \"Longfellow, History of,\" by
Howard Campaigne, June 1948.

5\. (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z and AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April 1957. This
source pictures the device as quite like the WWII German tele type
machines, but other sources indicate type attack was most useful.

6.fT0//S3 NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April, 1957,106.

7.(¥S-) NSA CCH Series XII Z.file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949.\"

8\. (¥93 NSA CCH Series IVW.1.5.12, \"General History of OP-20-3-GYP,\"
nd, 108.

9\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, draft copies of Michael L. Peterson,
\"The Bourbon Problem.\" (T3//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z and AHA Series IV
E.1.1, George Howe, \"Historical Study ofCOMINT Production, 1946-1949,\"
April 1957. fFS)- NSA AHA ACC 7808, \"Monogram Report,\" 29 November
1949. (T0//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Longfellow, History of,\" N-31 to
20-L, June 1948.

10\. (TS//SI) NSA AHA ACC 1485, \"Analytic Machine Aids Panel Meeting, 9
February 1949.\" (T3//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Zand CCH Computer History
Box, OP-20-G \"War Diary Reports: March 1, 1943-May 31,1948,\" August
1945- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Processing o\\ \| Material By IBM
Equipment,\" 7 May 1948.

li.-fFS} NSA CCH Series XII Z,A. M.Gleason, \"Inversion of Matrices with
O\'Malley,\" 1948. (T0//G9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Joint Long Term
Program\" (Old Planning Material, 1948-1949) compiled by Doug Hogan.
(TOy\'/Or) NSA AHA ACC 16093, \"Rehabilitation of Bombe Equipments
1951-58.\"

12\. (T3//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Michael D. Peterson, \"Bourbon to
Black Friday: The Soviet COMINT Problem, 1945-1948.\"

13\. -(S) NSA CCH Series XIK Box 8, Snyder, \"Yearly Cost of
Representative NSA Machines,\" May 1955- The machine as constructed in
1948.

14\. GES) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Report of the Second Computer Study
Group,\" in NSA Technical Journal, XIX (Winter 1974), 21-61. (¥0//8f)
NSA CCH

Series XIIZ, \"Office of Computers, List of Computers,\" nd.

15\. fFS) NSA CCH iSeries XII Z, S-2733, \"Longfellow, History of,\" by
Howard Campaigne, June 1948. (¥9} NSA CCH Series XIII Z, \"Report of the
Second Computer Study Group,\" as in, NSA Technical Journal, XIX (Winter
1974), 21-61. (TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, \"Monogram and RAM
Panel Reports, 1945-1949.\" mffk) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of
Computers, List of Computers,\" nd.

16\. (¥S) NSA CCH

Series XII Z, S-2733,

\"Longfellow, History of,\" by Howard Campaigne, June 1948.

17\. (¥Si NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers:
A Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986. i&) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,NSA-314, (\"BISON,\" February 1955. fFS7?\$r)-(LacGinic,
Mooon) NSA CCH Series XII Z,

Glenn F. Stahly,

Fifty Years of Mathematical 1985. (TS//SI) NSA CCH 1 Modification,\" 4
March

Cryptanalysis,\" August

Series XII Z, NSA, \|

1953- (T0//0I) NSA CCH Series XII Z,NSA-712, \]5 March 1953. (T3//3I)
NSA CCH Series ---I \"STURGEON,\" 15 February

\[

xii q:

1954- (TS//SIJ NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support of
COM\|NT, Phase H,\" circa 1955.

18\. (T3//J3I) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IVE.1.1, George Howe,
\"Historical Study of COMINT Production, 1946-1949,\" April, 1957.

19\. fl\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers:
A Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986. (Hogan).

20\. (6) NSaIcCH Series XII Z.AFSA, \"R&D Personnel Plan ;FY 1950-52,\"
13 October 1952.

21\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed Remington
Rand/ERA materials, ERA Minute bboks 1946-50, and Accession 1825,
September 26\] I1950, \"Announcement of IBM Contract.\'

22\. (U) NSA RAM File: July 20, 1946, EngstromBuShips, \"Use Naval
laboratories, not ERA\"; August 12,1946, BuShip\$fERA \"DC Office not
legal, no plane allowed\"; and July 26, 1948, BuShips to ERA, \"All work
to be done in St. Paul.\"

EO 3.3(h)(2) PL. 86-36




IUH bhtKhH/CUMINMHEL USA, AUS, CAW QDR AND NJL\'/XI

23\. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy: Vannevar Bush, Ultra and
the Other Memex (Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, 1994).

24\. &■) NSA CCH Personalities File, Joseph Wenger.

25\. (U) Washington Post, August 16,1950.

26\. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper, Box 23,
\"Page \#211 attached to letter to Rumbles of Remington-Rand, August
25,1952.

27\. (U) The NCML in St. Paul was formally ended in 1954, putting a final
stamp to the end of the special relationship. Apparently, ERA was not
awarded any major contracts, except for the Bogart computers, from 1952
until late in the decade.

28\. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy, 371-6.

29\. (3S.) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"Members of NSA Science, Electronic, and
Mathematics Panels,\" circa 1953.

30\. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy, 375

31\. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed ERA
materials, Remington-Rand General Counsel to ERA St. Paul, February
16,1954.

32.48) NSA CCH Office Files, Personality Profiles.

33- B=S} NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder, \"Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949.\" (U) Emerson W. Pugh, Lyle R. Johnson, and John H.
Palmer, IBM\'s 360 and Early 370 Systems (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991),
451-2.

34- (TS//SI) Andy Gleason and Marshall Hall, called back into the Agency
for the Korean conflict, began a Junior Mathematician program and began
recruiting for it. Unfortunately, the program attracted only a few men
and was not continued. (TG//01) (Laconic, Nocon) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Glenn F. Stahly, \"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August
1985

35\. i& NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Origins and Development of the
NSASAB,\" 1 June 1965. fPS)- NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA SAB Members and
Minutes,\" 27 April 1954. Note that C. B. Tompkins and Howard Engstrom
were among those who were calling for such an independent \"academic\"
organization. Stanford Hooper\'s ideas on such an extension of his early
plea for science remain unknown. (3S//89 NSA CCH

Series XII Z, \"Statement of Task priorities for SCAG,\" 12 September
1951. £¥9) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Abbreviated History of SCAG,\"
February 1951February 1952.

36\. (U) Joe Desch was asked to become research director for \"G\" but
declined the position. However, he continued to serve SIGINT for the
rest of his career. He became head of NCR\'s military division and
served on many advisory boards.

37- (6) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Origins and Development of the
NSASAB,\" lJune 1965. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Statement of Task
priorities for SCAG,\" 12 September 1951. (S) NSA AHA ACC 28690, \"NSA
Science Advisory Panel Minutes,\" October 1956. f\[607i\]. In 1953
SCAG\'s name was changed to \"Scientific Advisory Board,\" and more
academics were recruited.

38\. \^ NSA CCH Series XII Z,AFSA \"R&D Personnel Plan FY 1950-52,\" 13
October 1952.

39\. (U) Like other organizations, the Agency did not replace its tabs
until the 1960s when small computers such as the IBM 1401 were
available. The 1401 was \"the\" computer substitute for the tabs because
of its low cost, its ability to mimic tab procedures, and its high-speed
printer. The Agency was one of the first to use the 1401s and had a
dozen of them by 1962. NSA CCH Series XIH Box 12, Tordella, NSA
GeneralPurpose Electronic Computers.

40\. £S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,List of Machines and Targets.

41\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. (TS//STHT arnnir, Nocan.) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn
F. Stahly, \"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985.
-\$& NSA CCH Series XII Z,ERA, \"Robin Progress

Reports,\" 1 August toi October 1952. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII
Z,AFSA2i \"Summary of the Early Operation of the Robin Machinery,\" 19
May 1951.

42\. (TS//3I) NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L. Sapp, \"The Analytic
Machines,\" circa 1955.

43\. (T6//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd.

44\. (TS//SI) (Laconic Nooon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly,
\"Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,\" August 1985, 42 (TS//SI)
NSA CCH





Series XIIZ, \"Office of Computers, List of Computers,\" nd.

45\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Office of Computers, List of
Computers,\" nd. (C) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Herbert W.Worden,\" EDP
Machine History.\"

46\. (S) NSA CCH Series XI K Box 8, Snyder, \"Yearly Cost of
Representative NSA Machines,\" May 1955. PCS//S9 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
James L. Sapp, \"The Analytic Machines,\" circa 1955- (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, \"Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,\" 30
May 1953, and various years. (3S-) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Sam Snyder,
draft copy of \"Pre-Computer Machines in Support of Cryptanalysis,\"
circa February 1978.

47\. £F8) NSA AHA ACC 8252, 0P-20-G, \"Communications Intelligence
Research Plans, 1948,\" 7 April 1947

48.4TS//8\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Joint Long Term Program\" (Old
Planning Material, 1948-1949) compiled by Doug Hogan. (TS//SI) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, \"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.\"

49\. (U) The sorting explorations continued on for some time with work
even being done at\"G\'s\" tab room. {&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA A E.
Roberts, \"An Experiment in the Rearrangment of Data (Sweater),\"
(Sorting, Nomad) 1 May 1950.

50\. (U) Charles J.Bashe, etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), Chpt.

4

51\. &8t NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers: A
Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986. (Hogan)
ffS//Sfr NSA CCH Series XII Z,\"File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel
Meetings.\"

52\. (TS//SI» NSA CCH Series XII Z, and, CCH Computer History Box,
OP-20-G \"War Diary Reports: March 1,1943 -May 31,1948.\"

53\. (¥8} The air force connection may have been part of the project
later taken on by RCA in one of its first entries into the computer
industry, its huge data processing tape machine, BIZMAC.

54- (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support of COM
INT, Phase II,\" circa 1955- 0\*\*) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and

Special Purpose Computers; A Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\"
23 May 1986. (Hogan)

55\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT,
Phase II,\" circa 1955.

56\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT,
Phase II,\" circa 1955

57\. (U) The electronic computers at NSA such as Abner and Atlas did not
displace the \"tab.\" Hundreds of them were used in the Agency during
the 1950s.

58\. (U) IBM became involved in the Sage project in late 1952, and by
1953 it was a major effort within the firm leading to the production of
almost fifty massive computer/communications systems. Charles J. Bashe,
et al., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 244.

59\. (U) The contract was for the very important Bogart computers for
editing incoming information. The young Seymour Cray was the architect.
ERA continued on with its 1103 deliveries to the Agency.

60\. £TS//S\*) The transistor contract of 1952 was NOBS 5750. NSA would
return toRemingtonRand/ERA with the Bogart request and then with the
emergency request to construct the Blueplate machine, an assignment that
was extremely demanding. fTS//0r) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"The Shearman
Complex: Part VII,\" Prepared by James L. Sapp, C425, circa i960.
(TS//DI) NSA CCH Series XII Z.NSA \"MPRO Technical Reports,\" circa
1956. Although it emerged in the laboratory shortly after World War II,
and had been nurtured by giants such as Bell Labs and RCA, the
transistor remained very expensive and unreliable. However, the
emergence of the junction transistor and new production methods in the
early 1950s signaled that it might soon replace the vacuum tube in
computers.

61\. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 132, 134,135,158.

62\. (U) The final contract was signed May 1952.

63\. &S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers: A
Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986, (Hogan), 2-4.

64\. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM\'s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 209.




65\. (TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, \"General and Special Purpose Computers:
A Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,\" 23 May 1986, (Hogan) 2-6.

66\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XI K, Diaries of Samuel S. Snyder. fcS} NSA
Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
GeneralPurpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 20.

67\. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XIK, Diaries of Samuel S. Snyder, June 1953
and August 20,1953.

68\. £TS//Sfl NSA CCH Series XIK, Diaries of Samuel S. Snyder, 31 July
1953.

69\. (TS//8I) NSA CCH Series XI K, Diaries of Samuel S. Snyder, 16
January 1953.

70\. (S\#») NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982, 73.

71\. (-S-) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of
NSA General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 20.

72\. (U) Honeywell agreed to a joint program.




