eovernmentattic.org

“Rummaging in the government 8 attic”

 

 

Description of document: United States Cryptologic History, Special Series, Volume
6, It Wasn’t All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate
Cryptanalysis, 1930s — 1960s, Colin B. Burke, Center For
Cryptologic History, National Security Agency, 2002

 

 

Requested date: 04-August-2012
Released date: 29-May-2013

Posted date: 24-June-2013

Source of document: National Security Agency

Attn: FOIA/PA Office (DJ4)

9800 Savage Road, Suite 6248

Ft. George G. Meade, MD 20755-6248

Fax: 443-479-3612 (ATTN: FOIA/PA Office)

On-Line Request Form

The governmentattic.org web site (“the site”) is noncommercial and free to the public. The site and materials
made available on the site, such as this file, are for reference only. The governmentattic.org web site and its
principals have made every effort to make this information as complete and as accurate as possible, however,
there may be mistakes and omissions, both typographical and in content. The governmentattic.org web site and
its principals shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or
damage caused, or alleged to have been caused, directly or indirectly, by the information provided on the
governmentattic.org web site or in this file. The public records published on the site were obtained from
government agencies using proper legal channels. Each document is identified as to the source. Any concerns
about the contents of the site should be directed to the agency originating the document in
question. GovernmentAttic.org is not responsible for the contents of documents published on the website.

-- Web site design Copyright 2007 governmentattic.org --
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE
FORT GEORGE G. MEADE, MARYLAND 20755-6000

     

Y
No

Serial: MDR-68543
29 May 2013

In response to your 4 August 2012 declassification request, we have reviewed the NSA
cryptologic history entitled: Jt Wasn’t All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate Cryptanalysis,
1930s-1960s. The report has been reviewed under the Mandatory Declassification Review (MDR)
requirements of Executive Order (E.O.) 13526 and is enclosed. Some portions deleted from the
document were found to be currently and properly classified in accordance with E.O. 13526. The
information denied meets the criteria for classification as set forth in Section 1.4 subparagraphs (c)
and (d) and remains classified TOP SECRET and SECRET per Section 1.2 of E.O. 13526. The
withheld information is exempt from automatic declassification in accordance with Section 3.3(b) (2)
and (3) and (h) (6) of the Executive Order. Section 3.5 (c) of E.O. 13526, allows for the protection
afforded to information under the provisions of law. Therefore, information that would reveal
NSA/CSS functions and activities has been protected in accordance with Section 6, Public Law 86-36
(50 U.S. Code 402 note).

Since your request for declassification has been denied in part, you may file an appeal to
the NSA/CSS MDR Appeal Authority. The appeal must be postmarked no later than 60 calendar
days after the date of the denial letter. The appeal shall be in writing addressed to the NSA/CSS MDR
Appeal Authority (DJ5), National Security Agency, 9800 Savage Road, STE 6881, Ft George G.
Meade, MD 20755-6881. The appeal shall reference the initial denial of access and shall contain, in
sufficient detail and particularity, the grounds upon which the requester believes the release of
information is required. The NSA/CSS MDR Appeal Authority will endeavor to respond to the
appeal within 60 working days after receipt of the appeal.

Sincerely,

7

BLAKE C. BARNES
Chief
Declassification Services

Encl: a/s
Volume 6
Declassified and approved for release by NSA on 05-29-2013 pursuant to E.0. >
/ z
*

13526. MDR 68543
National Seourity Agency
Central Security Service
CCH-E05-02-01

It Wasn't All Magic:
The Early Struggle to Automate Cryptanalysis,
1930s — 1960s

 
Cover Photos: (U) (clockwise from upper left): Hypo, Vannevar Bush, Harvest,
Joseph Desch, Gee Whizzer, Stanford Hooper, Bombe, Samuel
Snyder
    

UNITED STATES CRYPTOLOGIC HISTORY

Spectow Sertey
Volume 6

It Waswt Au Magic .
The Early Strugyle to-Automate
Cryptanalysis, 19304 - L960¥

Colin B. Burke

 

CENTER FOR CRYPTOLOGIC HISTORY
NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY

2002

a

eels elelel ele pal pel elelelelel ed pel fel elated pel pel eel felfelfeltel fel elated fel etre ele el petal pel pel fed pe fel el fel ei Peel ela elrel pel fel el fel fel pele fel fed pelfe fel

   
This page intentionally left blank

Page ii
-FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZOIXT—

~() Foreword . em ee we . oe * = as a0 8 s < oe. : fi me : . * es . = Sg « : 2 ee
@W) Introduction . Eas See. Re:

am Before NSA. Opened Its Files wee oh awe Delkaws seas eegeas eel
(U) The Stocks Were Not All They ........ bees ave ede eee ease
_ (U) Ask What the Agency Did for .. oo -e : we dleee bee nee wee”

- (U) Ask Not What the Agency Can. Do For . cose dee eee cee ee Qos
_(U) Inspiration and Patience ..0.-.0... mo teen ence eee Bh
(U) There Wasn’t Enough Magic .... < : tenes ae . oes see eeee FR
(U) A Story with Only a Few Acronyms .. 2.26.60 ceee ss “ To
(U) Two Decades before the Computer Cb ase a ed cease se ee 56

Chapter a ( U D An Academic in Need of the Navy « asa: Until |

(U) An Institution for the Real World Sa eae FS oe vy ee caes Oz wee
(U) A Man for All Technologies ....... a : ses Waa a wee ne ee Bo
(U) More Than an Ingenious Yankee ye 7
(U) The Politics: of Mathematics and d Engineering « Fete ee eee ee
(U) The Manager Of Science oo. cee cea vistieseeteneeces ed
(U) Bush and Stratton’s Dream .. 0.06 c cee cece ees LO

(U) Bush Confronts Little Science .... a aa a : ee 10 |
. Ww) Bush’s Great Plan . “ew en gowdeetaaeed Fs weed only eke oe ww 8 *
(U) Beyond Analog Mechanical Machines .........00000+6000

() Two Men with a Need .. 0. cc. cece eee e eee c eee eee e AZ
(U) A Man for the Navy «+. 0.00cee eee sete eee eee AZ gol
(U) Another Plan for Science and the Navy ee ere 14: sees
(UV) Hooper Confronts the Bureaucracy ....e. cece cee ene AG
_(U) A Few Men and Women for Secrecy SES ge

(U) The Search for Pure Cryptanalysis ..... a fe bas es cere LO
(U) From Electronics to Electromechanics ee tew cece e ee lO
(U) A Young ‘Man for the Future . seeeeee Be ces ewes +20

(U) The Dream Postponed Again . Oe ee ees earl gees SSS mo 20

(U) The Dream Reborn, for a Moment ee So

(U) Little Science Meets the Little Navy, Again : PS eee se oe eee BE
(U) A Man for Statistics. . cite aca ble a aleeee wees a's cette eee BE

(WU) Science and the Navy Need Other Friends | pele ie we eee QQ

(U) The Private World of Science eae s daee Wee scenes baale 24 Poke

(U) A Man for Applied Mathematics and iijormation pe eels eB

tv) American Science and the War: ~ - the NDRC sakes se a vee BGo

—FOP-SECRETHECHINTHREL FO-USA AUS_CAN- GBR AND NZL Page Iii
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREE TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBRANB-NZE

(U) Corporate Charity . ivaeGieevisieseeseebgess sows”
@ The Navy Comes in Second . cee cece ees eee eens eees 20

| ‘Chapter 2¢ U) The First Electronic ee .

Page iv

(UV A Reminder of Hooper’ $s Hopes and Frustrations. ar 33
(U) The Institutional Context... ec ec cee ee eeees 33
(U) The First Defeat: Bush Is Rejected cv eaeees De eee ee ewe 34
(UJ) A Machine Too SOON... cece cc cece eee s cancun seuens 34
(U) The Decision to Build a Machine scab eee ew ot cece ee eee BF
-(U) Bush and Wenger Select a Problem wee eee cence tenes BF
(U) The Index .......50005 re ee wake neces obese ee eee ZO
(U) An Added Bonus, Possibly .. 0.00 ce cence wee ee Qr
(U) Bush Outlines the Machine and Sets Different ‘Goals wo B37
(U) The Comparator Really Doesn’t Go to Washington ......38
(U) Too Much to Ask of Mere Machines ...... 0c s cee t eee BO
(U) No Thanks for the Memories 0... 00 cece ce ccescces se GO
(U) The Limits of Mechanics .... 6.0.00 ccc eens eee eeeee ee GO
(U) Let There Be Light, But Not Too Much ....... ec te ee ee Al
(U) The Most Difficult Problem of All, But It Wasn't 2.00006 Gh
(U) The Easiest Becomes the Most Difficult. 0... 66. e cece ee 42
(U) Beyond Murphy’s Law ......e. eee cess ve eee s ene es A
(U) Spring Is a Time for Love, Not Macey wie a ee bese 44
(U) RAM Project Seems to Die, Late 1938 . cee e cece ee eed
(U) A Comparator There May Never Be ... er oe eee 5)
(U) Big Science Begins to Emerge ..... eee eee e cece een e es AF
(U) Fire Control ..... Gee beeee eee ree bape b ed eae eee wees we eGO
(U) The Second Comparator few eee oo ee eee eR es cece eens ee GO
(U) OP-20-G and Ultra coc cece cence ned anew enens eens 7
(U) So Long for So Little. ree ee cee ee eeees eevee G8
(U) The Search for the Second Comparator eee aS Ra ele ne wee 48
(U) No Equal Partners in Ultra. we toe g wie ae es ae ween GQ -
(U) Another Machine That Wouldn’ 1 Saere er ee cece GO
(U) The Revenge of Mechanics: the First Rounds eevee FO
CFSHSEYREDL) Logs and Relays — the Gee Whizer. ce eeee cee FO
(U) The Navy Get Some. Changes .....0.cer cence ene ees vee ol
(U) The Greatest Kludge of All, But It Worked eee wee ee eee Re
-(U) Trying to Save Bush’s Reputation canes ec becenes eee eee eGe
(U) Yet Another Chance 2.1... cceeees Sr eee ee ee
(U) When the Ciphers Cant Be Broken bead ee eee ee eee ee FB
(U) Wenger to the Rescue ....cceeeuses cect ees eee eee Gd
(U) Mathematics to Meet the Great Challenge . wale sis bie was eases 54.

(U) Bureaucracy vs. Science, Again ...... sabe e eee teeeees +54

(U) ASeeming Victory for Science 1... .ccee eevee eee e eens 5
FOP-SECREMCOMINTHREL—FO-U6 A AUG -GAN-GB RAND

Chapter 3 (U) Bush’s Dream Does Not Come True

(U) A Look Ahead to Peace. ........04. beeececeeeeesenes s 63.

(U) January 1942: Too Much Too Late ..... see weaevecceee OF
(U) A Giant Step Backwards ....6..0 cece ee eeees Sqbiace ce een 64
(U) Haste and Confustion 1.00... c08 8. a Bina elelle, Mie ele alee wees 64
(U) Tessie Wouldn’t Either ...... Bed belle eeleliel ge pie e gis ale ele 65
(U) Tessie’s New Hat 2... cece ee cece ccc e er ecenes peeeecee 6 06
(U) You Can Use Some of the T. echnology . .

Some of the Time, Bute. .... cca cece ees eee eeeees Steees 67
(U) A Machine for Mrs. Driscoll’s Special Problem sae senees 69
(U) A Paper War, Perhaps 2.0.0... eee nes eww eens wees ee Td
(U) The Comparator Dies, Again ...... cece ees wee e eee ees eT
(U) Almost Another Digital Machine. 2... ccc c ce eee eee 10 72
(U) The Old Technologies Are the Best Technologies, ,

for ATIME Loe ccc ence ceases Cale abe eas eee 74
(U) Meanwhile, the Tabulator’s Revenge ......000080005 1074
(U) IBM’s Most Special Contribution ......... geecaees ys;
(U) In the Absence of Rapid Machines ...... ais vaevebeabeees 79

Chapter 4 (U) Meeting the Crisis: Ultra and the Bombe .

(U) Looking Ahead — Ultra Saves RAM and OP-20-G

Creates a Science Company ....cccrecccecascces seen ee 83
(U) The “E” Machine ..ccccc cece ewes GR Dees eeieeeeeewes +2 83
(U) Only a Few Were Able and Willing to Tackle “Ee oc ca cae 84
(U) The Poles Automate Cryptanalysis

in Their Special Way co.cc csccaccscccceseees nee ee BF
(U) Keeping the Bombe Secret for Too Long cece eee eee ee OF
(U) A Fresh Start against “E” wo. ccc cece ees we ee eee 86
(U) Analog and Parallel May Be Fast, But | wee e ete e ences ee SS
(U) Ask and Then Not Receive .......5.. Speen eb eee e eee ee 6 BD
(U) Gave All and Get 0.000006 6005 eee ee wen eet ee gees ee -:9O0
(U) What Happened After. ........ pb eweees cece eee ec es ee Ol
(U) Trust Builds Very Slowly 2.0.0.0... Wbeeea db ebaces 91
(U) Agreements and Agreements and Agreements, But ...... o1
(U) Going Separate Ways  ...0.. ccc nec ecccunce eee ewes 92
(U) America without an Ultra oc ccc ec ecco es eb ieee sees 93
(U) An American Ultra, Perhaps ........0.00. censdbantae 93
(U) Faster Than a Speeding Relay ........0cseececeeeees 94
(U) Great British Expectations .........000. cakes aie beeen’ 94
(U) Great American Expectations .......04... Owe ela eis eee ee 94
(U) Trying to Step Forward, Not Back ........ cette tee eee QT

(U) Britain’s Own Version of Bush’s Electronic Dreams ;.... 97

—TOP-SEGREHIGOMINFHREL—-F0-U6 AAU G—-GaN-GB RAND NZEHE— Page v
FOP SECRETHCGMINTHREL-FO-U GA -AUE—-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHI

(U) No Time for Electronic weiece ee base eee Wee oe DEP OE e5 98.
(UDA Crisis of Organizationa and ‘Technology ced ee eee ees - 99
(U) Searching for a Place in Ultra Shee babies Beene geese cence QO
(U) The Power of Innocence ........0000.00%: abe a eee ae ae QQ
(U) The Power OF IQGNOVaNCe wo cece cece eee eee nees ee ee AOL.
(U) The Cousins Will Have Their Way. to a Degree cece eee LOZ
(U) A Long Apprenticeship ..... ja lng eee ga deeese ceeeeees LOG
(U) Desch Takes Charge ......... + Pee ewe dese ees gae eee AOR
(U) Wenger Gets His Organization cece e ence tees eseeeee AOS
(©) OfTires and Transmissions and | ae .
aDisappearing Laboratory .......5s00e0008: ae Pe eee 105
(U) Saving the American Bombe. oc cece ce eee cece eee eee LOB
(U) A Bombe Too Late ..........4. sae ewe eae eee seeeeees LOS.
(UWA Program Based on. ‘Another Technological Bet cease 109...
(U) July 26th: a Day of Defeat ste ener eeeneeeeeseeeees LOD
(U) A Victory a Bit Too Late wo. cee ccc cece . +109
(U) Ignorant NO More ..ccccecec ee ce ence ecccceeeneeecss lll
(U) The Bombes at Work ..... GEM A ea webb se Bebb ebee a Gales 111

(U) More to It Than the Bombe ........... ween ee eee ee eee 112

Chapter | 5) A Search for Other “Bombes”

CT) Meanwhile, the ATMY ...00006. ee cs Selele es 8 " weeds 127

(U) The Search for Another American ‘Ultra . cab bas . 128

_()A Great Electronic Adventure, the Freak . BE Gee aces eeee 129
(U) Tabulators and Traffic: A Data Processing War eee ee AZO.
(U) Making the Tools More Powerful ........ sec c cence nes GQ
(U) Slides, Runs, and Endless Decks of Cards se seeeececes AZZ
(U) The Other Bombe Program ...ccc ccc ccc n eee wecece ABZ
(U) Another Step Back .. 0. cece cece cee eens cee eee eevee e ll QF

- (U) More to It Than the Machine ..... vp acggene ek wine be ans 0hQZ-

_. (U) A Machine Looking for Work ....00 ccc cece ene a eee ee ZOD”

_ () More Emergencies and More Compromises. .......... 140.

~ () The Other Purples vo ccc cece cece teens cre eeleea Cb 142
(U) New Guys and Old Guys, New Techniques Ep Spas

and Old Insights ........ See eee cab eee eee ce eee ve el 2.

(U) A Matter of Machines and Control Spa ee eed wh bee ke ee 143
(U) The Snake That Died Too Young, Viper......... cael ea 144
(U) A Snake in Hand, Perhaps — Python 0.606 cee eee ee 146
(U) Of Strips and Strippers .......6.64. geet eee ees eee e es G8
(U) Strips Without Strippers .......05. bees cece eee ces eee IAGO.
(U) The Attack on the Many JN25s . Cobble eee cb beets ete 150
(U) The Comparators. That Weren’t the Copperhead :

Page vi

Proposals and the Vietory of Electronics ...... pee eee ASS
FOR-SEGRETICOMAFHREL-FO-U6 AAS CaN -GBRAND-NZ EC

(U) Beyond the Copperheads — the JIN25 Crisis eon
and “M’s” Response .......045 pp eeeee cen ee eee eee ASS

Chapter 6 (U) Beyond the Bombes and Beyond World War II

(U) After the Bombe oo... ce eens cent eae ee ee ees “eee ee ees 163
(U) Every Which Way: The Code Challenge Continues wees 164
(U) The Navy’s Madame X — the Strongest Selecton CE ews Oe 105.
(U) A Wall of Knobs ....... pee en cesses sabes deweveveeees LO6
(U) Walls of Tubes ..... semeeeeseaeeee cee ee eee ew 8 eee’ 167
(U) Into the Beyond and the Past, Rooms of Wires .
and Disk 2... 000: ee Veda Debi e Weed eb e eee ee ee eee 168

(U) Desparate Options and a Conservative Selector ........ 168
(U) Walls of Pipes and Thousands of Dots ....... ene ee eee 169

(U) The Relay Selector Gets an Electronic Face Lift ........171
(U) The Biggest Snakes of All — The Navy Almost Builds

an Electronic Bombe 2.0... 00sec ee a's eevee cece nese ees lh TQ
(U) The Serpent and Friends ..........0005 se ema ees eee lS
(U) The Revenge of the Enigma — or Electronics
Ts Inescapable 1. .c sees cen cceesaecveces Saeee wee eee LIT
(U) Beyond Cribs: the Statistical Bombe Seles cee e eee wee we . 178
(U) No Escaping Electronics, Enigma Meets the Cobra ees 80
(U) The Navy’s Duennd .o.scccsccccscsvcceccccs be eecees 180
(U) From Relays to Tubes, Rosen Gets His Chance .........182
(U) Engineering Pride and Peacetime Priorities ...........183
(U) Keeping the Faith: the Return of the Film Machines . 184
(U) The Revenge of the Codes, Again .......00ceeeeees » +. 184
(U) More Numbers Than Ever Before. ..... eer ieee -- 186
(U) Dr. Bush, Your Best Friend Is Really the ‘Army ve neess ASO
(U) The Great 5202 ... eee a wel Oo ote be eee ewe eee eee ee . 190
(U) Beyond the Comparators ....... vee eee one S bebe eeeeae 191
_(U) The Machine That Wasn’t ....... cece cccceneceevceceslOl

Chapter 7 (U) The Magic Continues

(U) Would History Repeat Ttself? 0.0.0.0 0 ccc cee een LOO

(UT) What There Wasn't ...... etawee cc eewes cab ee ee eee es 200
(U) Signs of Some Appreciation ..... epee weve eege ee .. 201

(U) More MAGIC: Cryptanalysis Continues as 's Before. oe ee 202
(U) A Cryptologic Future: Architecture and Ambiguity

 

 

 

 

and Budgets ee wee we ee eee eee eo ee we ee eee ne Le eees 203
(U) The Enigma Is Dead (We Think):
Long Live the oe wee sete ee ee wene cess +2 6 e204
(U) A Hangover from Another Time 00.09 o yee. eens 121205
a . oo P.L. 86-36

—TOR-SECRETICOMINT/RELFOUEAAUS-GaAN-GBR-ANB-NZ EH — Page vii
FOP-SEGRETHIGOMINTHREL-T6-UGA-AUG-CAN-GBROANB-NZEE—

(U) Mrs. O’Malley’s. Wayward Son .. See EA bob ©

 

 

 

 

(U) Faith Without Institutions: Slides, Sleds and Skates + 214 |

(U) Faith and an Institution: the Chance to Begin an Era ..218

()A Bright Hope for Hooper’s Dream ........4..-. «+ +2220
(U) The Grand Machine of Its Time, the New Comparator + «221
(U) Meanwhile, a Last Chance for Micrajilm cael ears bene eo e223
(WU) Finally, the Electronic Bombe ben oe dees see eceeeeec ee 223

~ P.L. 86-36

— S4SP) The Grand [Machine ............. oe 208
(U) Hecate’s Impressive Competitor oo... cceeeeeeeeeeees 211
(U) The Universal RAMs Peete eee e eee eee ences ener eee BLL
W@W) The Illusive Matrix: vc. eee wceens we wees peeves eee ee PED
(U) It’s a Nice Idea, Dr. von Neuman, But weeee eee aes eee e212.

Chapter 8¢ U) Courage and Chaos: SIGINT and the Computer Revolution

(U) It Wasn't Safe at the Cutting Edge wees - wobec eee eee QGZ-

(U) An Idea Differed wi cccc ccc cc cece cee ec sees s cesses 233
(U) Goodbye Dr. Bush, Hello Professor von Neuman cee eo 236

(U) A Summer in Philadelphia —an Exciting One « oe ee 238

(U) Buy a Computer, Now fe ae eo ks ad

(U) Little Thanks for That Memory ........+3: eee bee 200 e244

(U) Saving a Reputation through Logic see eee scene eee ees 247 :
(U) The Army’s Problem occ ccc cee e cece eee e eee ceee se t2qB
(U) Stratton’s Dream Revisited 6... 00. cece een ee eees «251
(U) So Much for Simplicity . sece'et cabee ces es eceeees 253

(U) Abner’s Not Quite Best Friend veces cece eee een e ee ee 5G
(U) Abner by Inertia .... cc cece wees Cece wr eee eens toe es eR
(U) Abner’s Bad Temper ...... cegbwes ebase eb eae bs wees wee 256

(U) And Then Came ee es SOs beep ee be SWs Pee ee ae ee easeeie W257

Chapter 9(U)- Wandering into ‘Trouble

Page viii

(U) A Cryptoanalytic Future ooh a een ee Se ees eed By - 263,

(U) The Worst of Times 2... ccs cc cece caw esewcecnees soe 2 263
— (U) The Magic Continues 1.0.06 cc ew erence ce ee eee eee nes 265

(U) At Last, the Electronic Bombe _ - Perhaps ce eeeeeeeee ss 206
(U) Without Magic and without Many Friends eee eeeeaeean 268
(U) The End of an ERA wecccc ecu e cee ce eee eeeees wees ees 269
(U) ERA’s Treasures occ cece scene ES weeee 270
(U) SIGINT Loses Another Friend See e eae eves eee eee eeees 271-
(U) An Old Friend’s Burdens .. See ee ee eae eae ee eee BIZ
(U) A Desperate Search for “Depth” eeane cee c ewe ewes e nee et2I4Q

Ww) Wanderers and Nomads and Chaos ....s.5%. sees ee 6 276
(U) If You Can’t Trust Someone from .
the Adams Family, Then.. 6. ..ceseccecer cece eceeeeees 278
(U) Failure upon Failure 2... 60.00 eee Cee eeeeweeee pa .. 280

Chapter 10 (U) A Matter of Faith

(U) Would Science or an Old Tactician Save the Agency? » + 285
(U) Rushing “Bits,” Not Even “Bytes,” into the Agency .....285

(U) Canine Guards the Fort ..... Cae eweevecneees aeaeese - 287
(U) EnterTom Watson and IBM 2... cece cece caeweas eee 289
(U) A Machine for Us, Perhaps ......0..0000 peeweenneeees 292
(U) One Big Machine Beats Out Many ‘Little Ones ....ee00. 293
(U) An ERA by Any Other Name ISIBM ....ceccccees eee e295
(U) Is Half a Farmer Better Than ..... eee cet e cece e cece 6 290
(U) St. Paul in Mohansic |... eee cee ae eee eee eeees + 297
(U) Bucks Talk: the Favored Sister Gets the Attention sees 297
(U) A Data Factory oo... cece ween eceees wee seee eee a eee ee 298
(U) Not a Farmer, ANomad 2... ccc cee ce cee tee eeees 299.
(U) Engineering Is Not Science, at Least to the ‘SAB. wee ee -3GOO

(U) You Can Take Science Out of the Agency, But Can You .302
(U) Almost in Science — Would Lightning Be —

the Other Harvest. ccc ccc ccc eee cae peewee «+ 3O5
(U) What Kind of Friend Are You, ‘Dr. Baker? .....00.6 00s 3O7
(VU) Dr. Baker’s Half-an-Institute oo. ccc ccc eee ewe aesees «309
(U) A Harvest of Querexpectations .... 0. cc cece cece eee eees 310
(U) ERA’s and the Shop -floor Cryppies’ Revenge we eee ewes 313
@) Technology and Faith, 1962) ......086. se eeee eee aes « «316

TOR-SECRETICOMIAT REL FO-US AAS -GaN GER ANENZEIE Page ix
Page x

This page intentionally left blank
Foreword

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(U) Conventional wisdom about NSA and com-
puters has it, asa retired NSA senior officer once
wrote me, “In the early days, NSA and its predeces-
sor organizations drove the computer industry. In
the 1960s, we kept pace with it. We started losing
ground in the '70s, and in the ‘80s we struggled to
keep up with the industry.”

(U) True, but underlying this, in each decade
the cryptologic organizations experienced a wide
range of successes and failures, positives and nega-
tives. If, as slang puts it, “they won some, lost some,
and some got rained out,” all of this experience is
worth serious examination by students of comput-
ers, cryptanalysis, and NSA history.

(U) The current volume, Dr. Colin Burke’s It
Wasn't All Magic: The Early Struggle to Automate
Cryptanalysis, 1930s-1960s, contains a view of the
first decades ofcomputer development that is
broad and deep and rich.

(U) It begins inthe 1930s as American and
British intelligence officials confronted new crypt-
analytic and cryptographic challenges, and adapted
some intriguing new concepts to their analysis. It
carries the story to the flexible and fast systems of
the late 1950s and early 1960s.

(U) Dr. Burke follows and links the develop-
ment of automatic data processing from the critical
conceptual work of the 1930s through the practical
experiments born of national necessity in the world
war to the postwar development and the previously
untold story of NSA’s postwar computer develop-
ment. Along the way, he has rescued from obscuri-
ty some important successes — and some important
failures ~ in cryptanalytic machinery from World
War IL.

(U) All too often, discussions of NSA’s comput-
er development treat only the mainstream, ignoring
the problems, failures, dead ends and might-have-
beens, in order to concentrate on successes. In the
present volume, however, key components of
Dr. Burke’s story and important for our knowledge
are the machines which didn’t work or which never
had progeny, and why this was so. Just as impor-
tant are Dr. Burke’s cautionary tales about the
influence of international and interservice rivalry
on plans and procedures. Technical limitations and
technical opportunities shaped much of the devel-
opment ofcomputing equipment, but the story is
also replete with instances of man-made _ barriers
and baleful bureaucratic bypaths that wielded great
influence during much of this development.

(U) Aword about how this manuscript came to
be.

(U) Ano less important factor than the infor-
mation and analysis in this current volume is that it
represents an objective view of NSA’s computer his-
tory by a writer not from NSA or one of the Service
Cryptologic Elements. The author, a university pro-
fessor, had nostake ineither defending or
besmirching decisions made fifty years ago or the
organizations or people who made them.

(U) The Center for Cryptologic History,
between 1990 and 1999, administered a program to
bring outside academics or researchers tothe
CCH for special projects. The CCH sponsored six
Scholars in Residence in that period; of the six, the
first two received security clearances for work on
classified projects. The others remained uncleared
and worked only with declassified materials.

(U/ FOO} Dr. Colin B. Burke was the second
of the two cleared scholars.

Page xi
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TOUSA AUS, CAN GBICAND NEE

(U/APO6O}-Dr. Burke’s professional biography
is given at the end of the book. Note that as a pro-
fessor of both history and computer research tech-
niques, Dr. Burke became one of the pioneers in the
field of computer history.

(U/FFE8O) As background reading, T recom-
mend not only Dr. Burke’s own unclassified
publications, available commercially, but two clas-
sified histories available from the Center for
Cryptologic History: Thomas R. Johnson,
American Cryptology during the Cold War (4 vols)
and Michael L. Peterson, BOURBON to Black
Friday.

DAVID A. HATCH
Director,
Center for Cryptologic History

Page xii FOP-GECRETHCONINTFHREL-TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBR AND NZEINT—
(U) Introduction

 

 

(U) Before NSA Opened Its Files

(U) 1am one of those “outsiders” I talk about
so much in the later chapters of this book. I was
fortunate to be brought into the National Security
Agency asone ofthe Center for Cryptologic
History’s first Scholars in Residence. I was bor-
rowed from my university because I had spent a
decade working onthe history of computers at
NSA’s predecessors. [even had the courage to
write a book about the subject.*

(U) That monograph was onthe machines,
policies, and relationships that led tothe U.S.
Navy's cryptanalytic machine (computer) pro-
gram in World War II. The book was also about
the first major attempts to automate the
American library. It had to be about both because
the same people built bibliographic and cryptan-
alytic machines.

(U) My study covered events in the history of
the machines through the 1940s, but its focus was
on the period between 1930 and 1945. An impor-
tant conclusion was that the relationship between
the efforts of America’s codebreakers and the
emergence of the modern digital electronic com-
puter was more complex than had been thought.
The navy’s cryptanalysts were in a push-me, pull-
me situation. Their work made mechanization a
necessity, but the pressures of war and the refusal
ofthe government bureaucracy to sponsor long-
term research and development programs pre-
vented the navy from becoming the inventor of
the modern computer.

(U) During World War II American cryptana-
lysts built some ofthe most sophisticated elec-
tronic machines inthe world, but the need to
address cryptanalytic crises blocked them from
creating the general-purpose digital electronic
computer.

(U) Just asmy book was published, I was
asked to come tothe National Security Agency.
One purpose of my year in residence was to see if
it was possible to write a complete history of com-
puters at the Agency. The goal was a monograph
that covered the entire life of NSA and its prede-
cessors. The thought of finally being able to see
the many highly classified documents that had
been withheld from me more than balanced the
pledge Ihad to give: [had to promise to refrain
from publishing without the approval of NSA’s
censors.

(U) The Stacks Were Not All They...

(U) I began my residency bysurveying the
Agency’s archive holdings and by rereading the
few synthetic works that had been declassified.
The comprehensiveness ofthe archive holdings
was critical because unless enough of the correct
type of documents had been saved and indexed,
there was little chance to produce a history of the
post-World War Ilera. Useful documents from
the 1950s through the 1980s were of special
importance because the Agency had allowed
almost nothing about its operations inthe last
forty years to be made public. There was not even
acounterpart tothe informative but very
unhandy collection of documents on the pre-1946
period released tothe National Archives, the
Special Research History series.

(U) AsT examined the collections, I was
pleased to find that the materials I needed to

FOR-GEGREHIGOMINFHREL-T6-U6A-AUG-CAN-OBROAND-NZEE— Page 1
FOP-GEGRETHGCOMINFHREL-FO-UG AUG C-AN-OBR- air NEL —

revise my earlier work were plentiful and well
organized. There were several contemporary
studies of computer efforts up to 1945 that were
technically as well as historically enlightening.

(U) I was also happy to discover that although
Thad not been correct in all the details about the
early American cryptanalytic machines, I had
come quite close. I concluded that I had drawn an
acceptable overview of the computer efforts of the
army and navy cryptologic agencies up to 1950.

(U) But I was less than content with the mate-
rials for the postwar era. I decided that it would
be impossible to tell the type of story about the
forty-five years since the Korean War that I had
done for the earlier period, at least not within one
year.

(U) However, there were many documents,
several oral histories, and the work of Samuel S.
Snyder to provide a basis for a history of comput-
ers within NSA up to the early 1960s.

(VU) Ask What the Agency Did for...

(U) Samuel Snyder was one ofthe founding
fathers of machine cryptanalysis. He joined the
army’s cryptologic unit inthe 1930s and
remained at the Agency, becoming important to
many of its computer projects of the 1940s and
1950s. His experience, his desire to document the
Agency's computer history, and his commitment
tothe welfare of NSA, made its administrators
receptive to his requests to be allowed the time
and resources during the late 1960s and early
1970s to write about the Agency’s computer his-

tory.

(U) Mr. Snyder completed several works.
They ranged from sketches ofthe history of the
army’s first electronic computer, Abner, to a sur-
vey of the general-purpose electronic computers
the Agency had built or purchased. The study of
the “gp” computers seemed so important and fit
so well with the Agency's desire to obtain good

Page 2

publicity that it was declassified and, in various
forms, published inthe open _literature.?

(U) Mr. Snyder’s work showed the contribu-
tions of NSA tothe development of computer
technology and to the emergence of the American
computer industry. It made it clear that NSA had
been a major sponsor of technical advances. Like
several other large government agencies, its com-
puter purchases and its research and develop-
ment contracts helped establish America as the
world’s leading computer manufacturer. He also
made it clear that NSA had been at the cutting
edge of computer technology and architecture.

(U) Iwas very tempted tojust deepen Sam
Snyder’s work on post-1950 automation, but as I
went through the hundreds of record boxes at the
archives and asT began to reflect on their con-
tents, I decided that I had to do something differ-
ent. [had totake analternative view of the
Agency's computer history.

(U) Because of the need to guard NSA’s crypt-
analytic methods, Mr. Snyder could not discuss
the reasons for the development of the devices he
included inhis published works. Just as the
Agency cannot reveal its cryptologic successes
without endangering them, Snyder could not give
either the “why” or, in many cases, the “what” of
the Agency computers to the public. The jobs the
NSA computers had to perform and the decision
processes that led them to be part of the famous
collection of machines that once resided in the
Agency's “basement” had to be left out of his stud-
ies.

(U) He certainly could not discuss what were
and are the most intriguing machines at NSA, its
dozens of special-purpose computers, ones whose
architecture embodies acryptanalytic process.
Doing more than listing their cover names would
have revealed what methods the Agency was
using and what targets it was attacking. Neither
the NSA nor the British intelligence agencies were
responsible for the initial release of information

“TOP SECRE TICOMINTIRET TO USA AUS; CAN, GBR ANE NZtit—
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA,AUS, CAN GBR AND NZDIAT

about MAGIC and ULTRA. The stories were told
by others.

(U) The restrictions on Mr. Snyder had anoth-
er influence. Because he was forced to divorce
SIGINT and computer history, the machines he
described seemed to have emerged as a result of
an indestructible synergy between the Agency,
the computer industry, and America’s scientific
community.

(U) My knowledge of the course of technolog-
ical advancement in the cryptologic arena in the
1930s and 1940s led me to doubt that the postwar
era’s machine history was so smooth and problem
free.

(U) There was something more fundamental
about Mr. Snyder’s approach that led meto
search for alternative ways to interpret the docu-
ments that were emerging from the NSA archives
and the offices ofold hands atthe Agency.
Although Snyder’s articles are invaluable, his
interpretation seemed unlikely to be able to bring
together the policy, the cryptanalytic, and techno-
logical histories of SIGINT computerization.

(U) The emphasis in his public articles was on
what the Agency’s computer efforts did for others,
especially the computer industry. But Ihad a
clear sense that I could tell the story of computers
only by using anapproach that was the near
opposite of Sam Snyder's. Focusing on NSA’s role
in transferring technology and supporting com-
mercial computer development, I concluded, hid
as much or more than it revealed.

(U) Ask Not What the Agency Can Do for...

(U) To understand computerization at NSA,
the question should not be “what did NSA do for
the computer industry?” but “what was it that the
industry could not or would not do for NSA?”

(U) The second question leads an investigator
into the many technical, institutional, and politi-

FOR-SEGRETIGOMHFTREE -TFE-USAAUS-CAIN-GBROAND NELIRT

cal struggles that the Agency faced as it attempt-
ed to keep up with the cryptologic capabilities of
its adversaries. It helps to explain why NSA has
had to build so many special computers, why it
invested in several technological misadventures,
and why it had to involve itself insome unusual
relationships with private industry and academia.
The question also helps to integrate the political
history of NSA with its drive to advance mathe-
matical cryptanalysis.

(U//FOUO) For example, using the “couldn’t
do” approach to Agency projects led meto an
understanding of NSA’s great computer adven-
ture, the Harvest system. It also helped uncover
the Agency’s reason for creating its high-powered
mathematical think tank at Princeton. Both the
computer and the institution were the result of
much more than a desire to extend the reach of
formal cryptanalysis; they were born of intense
political pressures on the Agency, and they were
grand compromises rather than perfect solutions
to abstract problems.

(U) Spotlighting what the computer industry
could not do for signals intelligence also helps to
integrate the Agency’s computer and cryptanalyt-
ic histories. Putting them together shows that
inventing and developing an effective technology
for SIGINT has been difficult and, at times, ago-
nizing.

(FSF/SHFREE) The “couldn’t do” question

also illuminates one ofthe most fascinating
aspects ofthe history ofcomputers atthe

National Security Agency: the drive to define and
implement a computer architecture that was rad-
ically different from the classic design that is now
called the von Neumann architecture. Since at
least 1946, American cryptanalysts have done
much more than use parallel and pipeline pro-
cessing; they have sought, and came close to
achieving, a unique architecture for a cryptanalyt-
ic general-purpose computer. Because the com-
puter industry was unwilling to develop machines
that served only one customer, NSA was forced to

Page 3
FOR-GEGREF/GOMINTIREL-FO-USAAUS-CAN- GBR aire NELIXT—

design and build not only single-purpose
machines but its own versions of a general-pur-
pose computer. Its Sled and Dervish family of
high-speed devices reflects the Agency’s special
needs and challenges. Unfortunately, creating an
all-purpose special NSA computer was too much
for the Agency, given its resources. Its famed
Harvest computer, for example, was only a partial
representation of a true “cryptanalytic” computer,
partially because the computer industry could not
focus on Agency needs.

(U) When the “couldn’t do” question is
extended to American universities, it becomes
easier tounderstand the difficult relationship
between NSA and “outside” scientists and their
institutions. Finding and utilizing academic tal-
ent was very difficult for the Agency. Professors
did not rush to NSA before or after World War I,
and they did not pursue much research that was
of direct help to operational cryptanalysis.
Devising ways to preserve the Agency’s secrets
and its independence while channeling the con-
tributions of academics proved tobe very diffi-
cult.

(U) Inspiration and Patience

(U) Something besides the relationships with
the commercial computer industry and academia
has to be called on to explain NSA’s computer his-
tory. Toshow why the Agency created its own
computer architecture and why it accepted some
technological retrogressions calls for abit of
cryptanalytic muckraking. The craft of code and
cipher breaking has to be stripped of its romanti-
cism.

(U) The stories ofthe successful American
attack onJapan’s diplomatic ciphers before
World War II (PURPLE-MAGIC) and the tri-
umph over the German ENIGMA-ULTRA are
used as popular models for the way cryptanalytic
work proceeds. The popular view shares much, in
terms of fundamentals, with the public view of
Agency computer development.

Page 4

(U) In the typical story, codebreaking success-
essuch asMAGIC and ULTRA came about
because of the quick and intense work of a hand-
ful of geniuses armed with brain power and little
else. The common image is that once the likes of
William F. Friedman and Alan Turing had their
flashes of insight, a flow of precious information
(and only valuable information) was captured,
processed bya hastily constructed but ingenious
machine, and then directed to decision makers.

(U) Such an image ofa heroic cryptanalysis is
far from being true or useful. Cryptanalytic and
technological victories have not come as easily as
that. Even during the glorious codebreaking days
of World War H, America’s cryptanalysts barely
kept up with their enemies.

(U) There have been moments when great
breakthroughs have led to critically important
messages. And the penetration of some systems,
such as the U-boat “E,” led to a stream of imme-
diately important information. But typical crypt-
analysis was and remains a continuing struggle to
discover patterns and to make sense out of moun-
tains of raw data.

(U) Most cryptanalytic solutions have come
only after years of the most tedious and disdain-
ful work. The intellectuals that Britain gathered at
Bletchley Park had to perform mind-deadening
menial computing tasks hoping that all their
labor would reveal mistakes by the German cryp-
tographers and patterns within message texts.
They had no magical mathematical formula that
eliminated the need for massive data processing.
Even when asystem was penetrated, creating
useful information from intercepts called for
large-scale data handling.

37/3 During the first decades ofthe Cold
War, when America’s enemies made the ENIG-
MA systems seem like cryptanalytic child’s play,
NSA could not re-create a MAGIC. It had to wring
information out of traffic analysis, plain text, and
even clear voice messages. That forced the Agency

~FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-USA AUG, CAN GBI ANE NZL
TOP-SPCRETHCOMINTTREL-TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZEH—

to become one of the world’s largest data proces-
sors.

(U) On top of the special computing needs of
cryptanalysis, NSA’s insatiable need for what
many times was unique data processing equip-
ment, made it a computer leader.

(U) The National Security Agency has not
been such animportant influence in computer
development because ofits mathematical wiz-
ardry or because ithas amandate to transfer
technology tothe private sector. The Agency's
contributions have come because ofthe unique
nature ofcryptanalysis and SIGINT and the
increasing difficulty of fulfilling a central respon-
sibility: the production of signals intelligence.
The Agency has sponsored supercomputers for
mathematics since the 1940s, but so have many
others. The critical contributions ofthe Agency
have come because of the special needs of opera-
tional cryptanalysis and SIGINT data processing.

(U) There Wasn’t Enough Magic

(U) In addition tothe “couldn’t do” perspec-
tive, auseful way to understand the history of
NSA’s computers is to place them within the con-
text ofthe struggles to overcome the particular
machines and methods of America’s determined
and increasingly clever opponents.

o}/40E0} The National Security Agency

has never bought or built computers for abstract
reasons. Its computers, even those for its hush-
hush think tank at Princeton, were acquired to
respond to very practical and immediate needs
and opportunities. From the early 1930s, when
the first IBM tabulating machines were brought
into the secret rooms of the Navy's OP-20-G, to
NSA’s massive computer projects of the 1950s,
and to the 1990s when the NSA computer build-
ing is filled with massively parallel and pipe-lined
special-purpose computers, the Agency’s
machines have been for the solution of problems.
There have been moments when the Agency has

“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA, AUS AN -GBROAND NEE

been allowed a bit of aluxury to pursue long-term
and general technological explorations, but they
have been rare and were always under the threat
posed by a shift in national, political, or military
policy.

(U) Despite all that, NSA has arguably been
the largest single user of advanced computing
machines in the world. It had to be. And because
ofthe unique problems it faced and methods it
used, it also became one of the most sophisticat-
ed sponsors ofnew computer and electronic
equipment. To do its job it had to invest hundreds
of millions of dollars into research and develop-
ment.

(U) A Story with Only a Few Acronyms

(U) The story ofthe Agency's struggle for
automation from 1930 tothe beginning of the
1960s could become an exercise inthe use of
acronyms. NSA and its predecessors were
bureaucracies with dozens of subdivisions and
name changes. The designation for the army’s
crypto branch, for example, was altered several
times before the end of World War II. Following
such changes is too much to ask of a reader who
wishes to gain the “big picture” of cryptanalytic
computer history.

(U) To keep the text readable, I decided to use
as few names as possible for agencies and their
subdivisions. For example, the army’s cryptana-
lytic branch is called the SIS until the formation
of NSA.

(U) Ihave also kept the goal of readability in
mind when describing machines and processes. I
have tried to use common terms whenever possi-
ble, even at the cost of glossing over some techni-
cal distinctions. Ihave even used the terms SIG-
INT and COMINT interchangeably, except in the
contexts in which the differences between the two
are significant to understanding NSA’s history.

Page 5
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-FO-UEA-AUG-CAN-CBR-and-NezLi—

(©) Two Decades before the Computer

(U) [have also tried to use consistent termi-
nology, although the story of the struggle to auto-
mate American cryptanalysis begins two decades
before the modern electronic digital computer
emerged. NSA’s automation story begins in 1930
when abright and devoted navy man, Stanford
Caldwell Hooper, realized that mechanized
cipher-making was outpacing cryptanalysis. In
his attempt to modernize the navy’s cryptanalytic
branch, OP-20-G, he engaged aproblem that
proved difficult for America’s codebreakers for
over a generation: How can asecret agency find
and use the best talents and technology in the
outside world? Hooper tried to solve that prob-
lem by creating anew type ofrelationship with
academics, specifically the man who became the
czar of America’s new Big Science of World War
Il and the first years of the Cold War — Vannevar
Bush of MIT.

Colin Burke
December 1994

Page 6

(VU) Notes

1. (U) Colin B. Burke, Information and Secrecy:
Vannevar Bush, Ultra, and the Other Memex,
Metuchen, NJ, & London: The Scarecrow Press, 1994.

2. (U) For example, Samuel S. Snyder, “Computer
Advances Pioneered by Cryptologic Organizations,”
Annals of the History of Computing , 2 (4980): 61.
FOR-GEGRETIGOMHFHHREL-FO-U6A-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND NZ ET

Chapter 1

(U) An Academic in Need ofthe Navy ... Until

 

 

 

 

(U) America’s communications intelligence
services were even more dependent on outsiders
during the 1930s than they were during the Cold
War. Neither the army nor the navy had enough
resources tobe technological innovators. They
could not afford their own research and develop-
ment programs, and they did not have enough
money to tempt the scientific and industrial sec-
tor into concentrating onthe cause of advanced
military technology. All the army and navy
branches suffered, but those whose functions
were not highly valued bythe military found
innovation far beyond their reach.
Communications intelligence was among the dis-
inherited.

(U) When it appeared that technology was
about tooutrun the established cryptanalytic
methods, the American army and navy’s commu-
nications intelligence services had to find ways to
compensate for their inadequate budgets and the
absence of relevant research and development
departments within the military.

(U) The navy was the first to try to muster new
technologies toconquer advances incode and
cipher systems. As early as 1930, one of its more
progressive leaders, Stanford Hooper, sought
ways to overcome the financial and organization-
al constraints on innovation in cryptanalysis. The
barriers were so great that Hooper could not take
a direct route to the creation or even the acquisi-
tion of modern calculating and data processing
instruments. He did not have the funds to under-
write an independent development project within
the navy or within the leading corporations. He
had to do the best he could with what help could
be obtained and do it without obligating the navy
to any major financial or institutional burdens.

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO-USA, AUS, CAN -GBICANE- NZL —

(U) Hooper’s odyssey led him to all those he
thought might be willing to give the navy help
without asking too much in return. Among the
many contacts he made during the 1930s, one
was of special importance to the history of com-
puters and the cryptanalytic rapid analytical
machines (RAM). Hooper was able to make an
arrangement with Vannevar Bush ofthe
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

(U) To understand the complex, near byzan-
tine histories ofthe development of computers
for cryptanalysis, especially the path-breaking
RAM program, and to appreciate the difficulties
oflinking science and codebreaking, the biogra-
phy of one of the leading high-tech universities is
required. As well, the life ofone ofthe most
important figures inthe history of applied sci-
ence, Vannevar Bush, needs tobe sketched. Of
special importance is the work Bush had begun
for other purposes. His attempts to build innova-
tive machines for scientific calculation and for
data retrieval determined what technologies he
recommended asthe basis for the first modern
cryptanalytic machines.

(U) An Institution for the Real World

(U) Since its birth on the eve of the Civil War,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology had
been devoted to applying science to practical
affairs. Its founders rejected much of the curricu-
la of the traditional American liberal arts college
as well asthe simple vocational program of the
trade school. They made MIT an example of how
practical men who worked in cooperation with
the new institutions of science and industry could
turn a university into a force for positive change.
Its founders, such as William Barton Rogers,
wanted to create men of vision, men who would
bring the benefits oftechnology toa backward

Page 7
 

—TOP-SECRETHEOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-am-NEE—

America. Rogers and his colleagues were the
builders of some ofthe most important instru-
ments ofthe American industrial revolution.
Their famous Comparator, for example, allowed
the exact replication of mass-produced _ parts.’
The name “Comparator” was probably selected
for Bush’s 1930s cryptanalytic machine because
of the earlier MIT device created by the Institute’s
founders.

(U) Rogers initiated MIT's long-term policy of
conducting research for business and govern-
ment agencies and of having its faculty actively
engaged in technological and business efforts.
MIT was badly hit by the recession of the 1870s,
and its future remained unsure until the water-
shed years of American life inthe 1890s. Then,
with amore secure financial condition and a
growing body of alumni and friends who had ben-
efited from the work ofits faculty, the Institute
expanded its curricula, acquired modern equip-
ment, and established itself asa force in
American academic and industrial life. The
Institute gained asolid reputation in civil and
mechanical engineering, architecture, naval con-
struction, chemistry, and electrical engineering.
By the 1920s the sparkling electrical engineering
department added afocus onthe new fields of
electronics and communications. The inaugura-
tion of Samuel W. Stratton as MIT’s president in
1923 accelerated the shift to electronics and rein-
vigorated the school’s attempts to create meas-
urement devices for industry and science.
Stratton’s background and interests blended with
those of MIT. Stratton’s interests and goals fit
with those ofthe Institute’s faculty, especially
some of the younger men who sought administra-
tive approval of their visions for MIT. All at the
Institute seemed toagree that more support
should be given to research, and most hoped that
the school would become a center for the applica-
tion of formal mathematics to engineering prob-
lems. One of the junior faculty with such a hope
was Vannevar Bush. The harmony between
Bush’s and Stratton’s views had much to do with
the younger man’s success. Bush received critical

Page 8

support from Stratton, allowing him to become
one ofthe most important men in the history of
American science and technology.

(U) A Man for All Technologies
(U) Ageneration later, atthe end of World

War II, Vannevar Bush
was one ofthe most

 
 
  
  
   

powerful _ scien-
tists the world
had ever

known and a
man familiar
to most
Americans.
The heritage
of his _ poli-
cies contin-
ues to shape
the organiza-
tion of academic
research in
America. Although
his plan for a federal
role in science was not completely fulfilled, the
National Science Foundation is testimony to his
influence.* Bush was important because of his
influence in such matters as the beginnings of the
atomic bomb project and the establishment of the
National Defense Research Committee (NDRC)
and the National Science Foundation. Despite his
enormous contributions while at MIT, despite his
influence within the inner circles during World
War Il and the Cold War, and despite his role in
shaping the nature of Big Science, and thus the
modern American university, little was written
about him until very recently.*

U) Vannevar

(U) The new interest has taken a rather unex-
pected turn. Instead of focusing on his policy con-
tributions, the spotlight has been on Bush’s role
inthe emergence of computers and information
processing. The research on his contributions to
computers arose as the new field of computer his-
tory was born in the 1980s. The seemingly more

-eP-SEGRETHCOMNTIREL TOUS, AUS CAN GRR ANDZEL A
“FOP-GEGRETHICOMHAHREL-TO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLI

intense interest in his role in the birth of informa-
tion science was generated bythe rediscovery of
Bush’s work on automatic data retrieval. His
ideas for amind machine, Memex, are now treat-
ed as the origin of hypertext and similar knowl-
edge systems. *

(U) More Than an Ingenious Yankee

(U) Bush merged science with tinkering, if not
technology. He was aninventor and a natural at
putting technology together in different combina-
tions to fulfill aneed. His efforts were always
goal-oriented because he realized that inventions
required amarket tobe successful. Bush paid
attention to the commercial aspects of technology
and built an enviable list of patents on devices
ranging from thermostats and typewriters to elec-
tronics.®

(U) After receiving bachelor’s and master’s
degrees in engineering from Tufts, Bush gained
some shop-floor experience while working for the
giant General Electric Corporation. He pushed
himself to complete a joint Harvard-MIT doctor-
al program in electrical engineering. He suffered
through a great deal of tedious calculation for his
thesis. Naturally, he searched for shortcuts to
complete his mathematical analysis of complex
electrical circuits and applied some ofthe many
tricks mathematicians used before the advent of
the modern computer. The doctoral degree and
the favorable impression Bush made on Dugald
Jackson of MIT soon proved of great value.®

(U) Just out of school, Bush became associat-
ed with World War I’s New London Research
Laboratory where the famous Robert Millikan
brought the nation’s best men to focus science on
the critical U-boat threat. Bush contributed to the
research with a-significant detection system,
joined the Naval Reserve, and became atleast a
junior member ofthe national military-scientific
establishment.

(U) Acomplex path eventually led to Bush’s
being one of the creators of Raytheon, a company
that was able to challenge RCA’s patent monopoly
over radio. Raytheon became one ofthe many
important companies tied to MIT and its stu-
dents.” Bush’s postwar entrepreneurial ventures
did not end his academic ambitions, however. He
accepted aposition asan assistant professor in
MIT’s Electrical Engineering Department. It was
understood that he would concentrate onthe
problems of high-power transmission, a focus
that was sure to attract support from the private
power companies which were beginning to con-
struct large regional networks. A string of articles
on power problems and the mathematical tech-
niques useful for their solution advanced his aca-
demic standing.

(U) The Politics of Mathematics and
Engineering

(U) Although Bush was a practical man, he
was also a missionary for the application of math-
ematics to engineering and science. He realized
he had limited formal mathematical skills, but he
compensated by supporting the work of men like
the renowned Norbert Wiener. Wiener was
brought to MIT to integrate advanced mathemat-
ics with teaching and engineering research. Bush
also encouraged his students to expand the fron-
tiers of mathematical engineering, with some
great results. Claude Shannon, a father of mathe-
matical information theory, was one of the many
young men influenced by Bush and Wiener. Bush
successfully courted the leaders of almost every
high-tech related corporation in America.
General Electric, Eastman, NCR, General Motors
and many other large corporations were familiar
Bush stomping grounds. Significant yet unex-
plained, Bush did not develop cordial and prof-
itable connections with the two major manufac-
turers ofcalculating equipment, IBM and
Remington Rand. History would have been dif-
ferent if IBM had chosen MIT over Columbia and
Harvard Universities for its attention and if

Page 9
FOP -SECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-GB Rad NEE

Remington’s leader had made acommitment to
academic research.

(U) Within adecade after his MIT appoint-
ment, Bush was a member of the most important
scientific organizations. Although the United
States did not have truly powerful scientific insti-
tutions, ones with the financial resources to shape
the course ofresearch, such bodies asthe
National Academy of Sciences, the National
Research Council, and the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics could influence what
science policy there was. They also provided
invaluable contacts for their members. By his late
forties, Bush had become more than a member of
such groups. He was a statesman of American sci-
ence.

(U} The Manager of Science

(U) After a long stint as dean and then as vice
president of MIT, Bush became a significant
national influence. In 1938 he became the head of
the Carnegie Institution, one ofthe most impor-
tant scientific research agencies inthe world.
That led to his assuming the leadership of World
War Il’s very powerful National Defense
Research Committee. The NDRC filtered hun-
dreds of millions of dollars of government funds
to privately directed research for the war effort.®
The NDRC was an improved and vastly expanded
version of the World War I submarine project and
was the fulfillment of some of Bush’s long-held
dreams about research in America. The NDRC
allowed academics something close to the best of
all worlds: They received government funding
free of most bureaucratic direction. It also fit with
Bush's belief that the military would change only
in response to outside pressures. By the end of the
war, Bush was the most powerful man in
American science and was a force the military had
to recognize. ?

Page 10

(U) Bush and Stratton’s Dream

(U) Bush began his work at MIT with research
onelectrical systems. Inthe early 1920s, Bush
directed his students to expand the reach of ana-
log computing. They began with rather simple
combinations ofrods and gears to create
machines for the automatic calculation of differ-
ential equations, but those first integraphs were
more than extensions ofthe old wire and cone
contraption that had made Stratton’s reputation.
The young men edged towards solving the major
mechanical problems that had prevented the
engineer’s friend, the planimeter, from becoming
a truly powerful tool. By the late 1920s, Bush and
his men were convinced they had overcome the
critical problem oftorque. They persuaded
Stratton and the other influentials at MIT that a
new and startling version of Lord Kelvin’s
machines could be constructed and put to pro-
ductive use in a few years.

(U) Bush was allowed to assign the best grad-
uate students tothe creation ofthe Differential
Analyser. In 1931, he announced to the scientific
community that the world’s largest and most
powerful calculating machine stood ready at MIT
to advance science and engineering. It brought
international fame to Bush and MIT.
International visitors came tothe Institute and
clones were built in Europe and America.
Aberdeen Proving Grounds and the University of
Pennsylvania built versions, and General Electric
found it so useful it invested in a copy for itself.

(U)} Bush Confronts Little Science

(U) Just as Bush’s Analyser was given so
much by the Institute in the late 1920s, the school
lost its state subsidy. Worse, Stratton’s hopes that
America’s largest corporations would donate a
constant stream of funds to MIT proved unrealis-
tic. MIT found itmore and more difficult to
finance research with its own resources, and its
leaders feared that it might be forced to retreat to
the vocational model of technical education. The

TORSECRETICOMINTIREL—TOUSA—AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLHK4—
FOR-SEGRETHCOMNTHREL-FO-GAAUG-CAN GB RAND NZ CHI

faculty, including Vannevar Bush, was on its own
and all had to struggle for the means to continue
research and to finance their graduate students.
The Institute’s new president of 1930, Karl T.
Compton, was as much a part of elite science as
Stratton, but he was more academic in orienta-

tion. A famous physicist, Compton arrived with a
mandate to turn the Institute back towards a true
scientific curricula and to integrate the latest sci-
ence with both teaching and research. Wishing to
reduce the growing ethical and educational prob-
lems stemming from the staffs business activi-
ties, and hoping to secure the funds needed to
allow internal financing of research, Compton let
itbe known that he desired more effort for the
Institute and less for faculty pocketbooks and cor-
porate sponsors.*° Informally, faculty were asked
to conduct research of general, not particular,
import. Formally, consulting fees were tobe

shared with the Institute, and patents were to
become the property of the school ifthe work had
been internally funded. To control the increasing-
ly complex patent problems and to avoid the dan-
gers inherent in a university holding patents, MIT
decided toturn tothe Research Corporation of
New York City. It was to handle all patent matters
(including determination of patentability and
allocation of shares to MIT, sponsors, and facul-
ty) and was to deal with all related legal ques-
tions.

(U) Even the great Vannevar Bush found it
difficult to raise funds until the second half of the
1930s. Bush launched upon analmost frantic
search for combinations oftechnologies that
might attract sponsors. Among other attempts of
the 1930s, he toyed with a machine to identify fin-
gerprints; he tried to devise a high-speed pneu-
matic printer; he played with the use of high-
speed metal tape and wire systems to send secret
messages; and he tried to find ways to automate
libraries. But he suffered through many years
without the kind of financial support that
Stratton’s earlier policies had promised, and,
most telling, he could not find the financing need-

FOP-GEGRETHGOMHAHTREE-TO-USA_AUS--CAN GBR AND NZD

ed for what emerged ashis grand plan for the
Institute.

(U) Bush’s Great Plan

(U) After testing reactions atthe Rockefeller
and Carnegie Foundations, and after considering
his possible role in Compton’s drive to make MIT
scientifically respectable, Bush put together a
grand plan. It was one he thought would attract a
wide range of donors, would be applauded by the
scientific community, and would lead to a perma-
nent source of support for the Institute. As well, it
would call upon the experience and talents of fac-
ulty from several of MIT’s departments. Bush
decided to make MIT the national center for cal-
culation and for the development of path-break-
ing scientific calculation devices. If Bush had his
way, MIT, not the National Bureau of Standards
(NBS), would realize Stratton’s dream.

(U) Bush knew that his Analyser had taken
mechanical technology to its extreme, so his plan
for the Center of Analysis included much more
than proposals to extend mechanical analog cal-
culation. Electronics, photoelectricity, and new
memory media were to be developed and com-
bined to produce revolutionary computers. Bush
also wanted the center to explore the new mar-
kets for what would later be called “data process-
ing.” His plans included digital calculation and
machines to solve the escalating problem of file
management inscience and bureaucracy.” He
announced that he would create machines that
would outdistance all competitors, especially the
IBM tabulator.* Supported by a group of gifted
junior faculty and acadre ofadoring graduate
students, he joined together all ofthe existing
measurement and calculating projects at the
Institute and began to weave new ideas for future
devices. 8

(U) Beyond Analog Mechanical Machines

(U) Mechanical analog devices were
approaching their limits of precision and speed in

Page 11
the 1930s. Although there were no commercial
competitors for such huge devices as the

Differential Analyser, ‘t Bush saw little worth in
cloning itin slightly improved form. If support
was to be found, he had to make a major techno-
logical leap in analog computing. But there was a
more fundamental challenge and opportunity for
the center: the growing demand for digital calcu-
lation, something MIT’s machine builders had
not yet explored. The rise of the social sciences
was creating a market for digital calculators, and
even engineers and physical scientists, who had
been so well served by analog devices for more
than a century, were tackling problems that called
for digital methods. Bush also knew ofthe

increasing need for high-speed digital calculation
inthe bureaucratic and business worlds. He
sensed opportunity because there had not been a
major innovation in large-scale digital machinery
since Hollerith patented his Tabulator.

(U) The call for digital processing merged
with another growing need, information retrieval.
Business and governmental files had grown to
unmanageable proportions. The hand, mechani-
cal, and electromechanical methods of data
retrieval were not satisfying bureaucratic
demands.” Influential researchers in many sci-
ences found itincreasingly difficult to keep up
with their areas of interest because of the deluge
of articles. Bush and many others lobbied for
projects that would allow scientists and engineers
totake the lead inthe new field of
Documentation. ©

(U) Bush decided to concentrate onthe
exploitation of three technologies: photoelectric-
ity, digital electronics, and film. Although new,
these technologies were much closer to being
ready for application than the still delicate mag-
netic recording. By focusing on the application of
these technologies to scientific calculation prob-
lems, Bush hoped to be innovative and to avoid
conflict with commercial firms.

Page 12

(U) Responding to positive reactions by the
Rockefeller Foundation, Bush sketched a radical
new design for an Analyser and, by mid-1936,
succeeded in raising the funds he needed to build
the next generation of his great analog machine.
The Rockefeller Differential Analyser was to be
much faster and much easier to program than the
mechanical version. Although itremained an
analog device, it incorporated electronics, digital
circuits, some photoelectric parts, and program
tapes. These allowed Bush to eliminate most of
the cumbersome mechanical components of the
first model. The new Analyser soon became a very
demanding, over-budget, and behind-schedule
drain on the resources of the Institute and a bur-
den to its students and faculty. The long-delayed
appearance ofthe Rockefeller Analyser also
became a threat to the credibility of Bush and the
electrical engineering department.*” However,
based onthe new developments in electronics,
photoelectricity, and film, he was moving into
digital calculation and what we now call informa-
tion retrieval. By the mid-1930s, Bush had rough
plans for an electronic “programmed” computer
and refined ideas about information machines. *

(U) Two Men with a Need

(U) A visit by Admiral Stanford C. Hooper and
his young assistant, Joseph Wenger, would lead
toone ofthe most bizarre episodes in American
history, would complicate Bush’s task of estab-
lishing his center, and would link MIT's foray into
information machines with the world of secrecy.
The Hooper-Bush agreement for the develop-
ment of radically new cryptanalytic machines for
the navy’s codebreakers had the potential to set a
positive role for academic scientists in the inven-
tion and evaluation of military technology. Its
promise was not realized, however. The project
turned into an exercise in bureaucratic bickering.
More than half adecade was spent dealing with
organizational problems rather than with the
technical barriers that were holding back the real-
ization of the potentials of electronic technology.
Despite all the efforts of Stanford C. Hooper,

F6P-GECRETH/GOMINTHREL—TO-ER-AUG,GAN-GE RAND Nett
“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA AUS-CAN-GBR-ANB-NZE—

Joseph Wenger, and Vannevar Bush, the United
States lost an opportunity to complete the first
electronic data processing machines and to make
them operational before the attack on Pearl

Harbor.

(U) A Man for the Navy

(U) Stanford C. Hooper prided himself on
being an innovator, and he devoted his career to
introducing new technology to a usually reluctant
United States Navy. Graduating from Annapolis
inthe early 1900s and assigned to the
Pacific fleet, he immediately began
tocreate the navy’s first radio
system. Transferred to
Washington, he stole hours to
study at Samuel W.
Stratton’s new National
Bureau _ of Standards.
Mastering the latest radio
science, Hooper then lob-
bied for the establishment
ofthe navy’s own radio
research division. Hooper's
expertise and advocacy of
electronic communications
soon thrust him into military
and civilian policy making.
Although still a young man and a
junior officer, he was instrumental
in creating the Radio Corporation of
America, the giant electronics cor-
poration formed at government
request at the close of World War I.

(U) Because ofits need for worldwide com-
mand and control, the navy had a special stake in
the success of RCA. Hooper hoped that RCA’s
special position would make it confident enough
toovercome the fear that government work
would threaten its patents. The hopes of RCA
serving as a research branch of the navy were not
completely fulfilled, but Hooper continued to use
its men and facilities while he searched for help
from others.

—TOR-SECRET/COMMFHREL—FO-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBRANE-NZETAI—

  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 

(U) By the early 1930s Hooper was advancing
through the navy’s ranks, was a much-honored
figure in electronics, and was an acquaintance, if
not friend, of the leading scientists and inventors
ofthe nation. Heused such contacts and his
expertise to devise and forward plans for a fully
integrated and modern information system for
the navy, one which was toinclude every
advanced technology. Hehad aneven greater
vision: to permanently wed science and the
navy.’ He was determined to prevent the navy
from being as unprepared as it was for World War

I. Hooper became tied to those in favor of
centralized administration and
increased power for the Chief of
Naval Operations (CNO). Hooper
began to develop a strategy, one
somewhat different from the

plans ofother ofthe navy’s
new progressive reformers.
He was willing to depend on
outsiders. Although he
helped give birth to the Naval
Research Laboratory and was
able to create special research
sections, such as the Code and
Signal desk inthe Bureau of
Engineering, he believed the
navy would have torely onthe
new research centers that were
emerging in the largest corporations
and universities.

(U) Ending his stay as head of

the Bureau of Engineering’s radio

section, where he fought for aradio moderniza-
tion program, Hooper moved from technical to
more general policy concerns. His appointment
as Director of Naval Communications in 1928
gave him an opportunity to aggressively pursue
his vision. And, when he assumed the newly cre-
ated position of special scientific advisor for the
navy in the mid-1930s and chaired its Technical
Research Liaison Committee, he had the chance
to expand his reach well beyond the traditional
boundaries of communications. All science-relat-

Page 13
—TOP-GEGREHICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN,GBR and NZLUX1__

ed fields, ranging from ballistics through medi-
cine and atomic energy, became part of his
domain. *°

(U) He and his most trusted proteges toured
the nation seeking ideas and establishing contacts
with scientists. As part ofhis plan, helaid the
bases for permanent cooperation with laborato-
ries and executives at Eastman, AT&T, General
Electric, and a host of other corporations. To cre-
ate a similar link with the universities, he found a
way toaward special military commissions to
academics so they could remain in the universi-
ties, yet bea part ofthe navy’s modernization
effort. In addition, hecollaborated with the
National Research Council aiding it by finding
projects and having it help the navy by identifying
qualified investigators.

(U) The identification of willing scientists and
new technologies was only a small part of his task.
Acrucial and politically sensitive step was to con-
vince the various divisions of the navy to accept
the civilian men and ideas. The way Hooper han-
dled that had a great deal of influence on the long-
term history ofthe automation of American
cryptanalysis and wedded the history of such
machines as Vannevar Bush’s Comparator and
Selector tothe broader struggle for professional
control within the navy.

(U) Hooper’s admiration for the country’s top
men led him toattempt toforce ideas upon
unwilling navy bureaucrats and skeptical techni-
cians. Asa result, he alienated many powerful
men. By 1937 serious complaints reached the
naval hierarchy about what was seen as interfer-
ence in the affairs of the various bureaus. Hooper
had todefend himself tothe Chief of Naval
Operations. After the confrontations and the
complaints tothe CNO, Hooper softened his
approach, but he continued to advocate the types
of technological innovations that did not fit with
the service’s existing bureaucratic structure. He
went ahead with his effort to modernize and pro-

Page 14

fessionalize the navy, but the political battles of
1936 and 19937 took their toll on him.

(U) Even when ill health and perhaps some
political complications arising from his worries
about America’s military readiness** led toa
reduction of his efforts in the 1940s, he remained
an important advisor on technical and scientific
matters and amember of such high science and
big budget organizations as the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics. Bythe time he for-
mally retired in1943 hehad, along with a few
other senior officers, laid the intellectual if not
organizational foundations for the Office of Naval
Research. The ONR became the organization the
navy successfully used to bring academic science
into the military after World War Il. The ONR
became one ofthe major sponsors of applied
mathematics and computers inthe United
States.*3

(U) Hooper’s influence did not end in 1943.
Although retired, he continued asa consultant to
major corporations and became deeply involved
with a company founded by some of his admiring
young men. The fascinating postwar Engineering
Research Associates (ERA) was planned asa
showcase for some of Hooper’s dreams. It was to
be a private company serving the advanced scien-
tific needs of the military. ERA became the torch-
bearer for the navy’s advanced cryptanalytic com-
puters.

(VU) Another Plan for Science and the Navy

(U) Hooper’s model for research, which cen-
tered on cooperation with the private sector, was
not the only one put forward by navy reformers.
During the 1930s, one of the navy’s progressives
was much less trusting of outsiders. Harold
Bowen, one of the fathers ofthe Office of Naval
Research, put his energies to strengthening the
navy’s own science and development capabilities.
While chief ofthe Bureau of Engineering from
mid-1935 to 1939,"* Bowen came in conflict with
the Bureau of Construction and its allies, the pri-

FOP-GEGRETICOMINFHREL-TO-UGE- AUS CAN: GBR AND NZEINT—
-TOR_SECRETICOMINFHRELFO-U6A AUS -CAN-GBR AND NZEIXT

vate shipbuilders. The issue was the design of the
navy’s new destroyers. Bowen was the political
loser and he remained convinced that the secre-
tary of the navy’s order to merge Engineering and
Construction into one new agency, the Bureau of
Ships, was a victory for the technical and political
Mossbacks. **

(U) Like Hooper, Bowen made many enemies
because of his fight to keep the navy up to date by
bringing in new ideas from industry and acade-
mia. Bowen wanted more research within the
navy and had faith in a revitalized Naval Research
Laboratory. One of his last acts as chief of the
Bureau of Engineering was to create its Office of
Research and Inventions. With the experienced
Lybrand Smith and some very enthusiastic young
officers onits staff, the ORI began todo what
Hooper bad been advocating for years: integrate
Engineering with the most talented men in pri-
vate industrial research laboratories and univer-
sities. The Office of Research and Inventions
became the navy’s organization to coordinate
with Bush’s NDRC. That led Lybrand Smith and
Vannevar Bush to become quite close despite the
growing frictions between Bush and Bowen over
research policies. Smith also became an impor-
tant player in the history of OP-20-G’s first crypt-
analytic machines.

(U) Bythe end of World War I, Smith and
Bowen had convinced the navy to create some-
thing Hooper had always wanted, the Office of
Naval Research. Bowen made sure the ONR had
the money, power, and contracting laws to con-
trol the relationships it established. The ONR
would use academia and industry to bring science
tothe navy, but itwas given enough power to
allow the navy, not civilians, to direct research.
Bowen hoped that it also had enough power to
withstand the protests of the old bureaucrats and
politicians.*° One of Bowen’s motives for estab-
lishing the ONR was to allow the navy to develop
its own program for atomic energy which, he
hoped, would lead toan atomic-powered ship
program.

(U) Hooper Confronts the Bureaucracy,
Agaim

(U) Stanford Hooper viewed science,
research, and innovation as significant to every
naval activity, but he maintained a special inter-
est and role in naval communications. His plans
for advancing radio communications led him to
become involved with the navy’s cryptanalytic
branch, OP-20-G. Hooper became a crusader for
the expansion and modernization of American
interception, codebreaking, and all other signals
intelligence capabilities. It was that involvement
that eventually led Hooper to MIT in late 1935.

(U) As with his electronics work, Hooper’s
plans for cryptanalysis came to center on institu-
tionalized scientific research. Atthe same time,
he supported the expansion of the navy’s cryptan-
alytic operating division, OP-20-G.

(U) For historical reasons, Communications
(OP-20) rather than the Office of Naval
Intelligence housed the cryptologic department
that became known as OP-20-G. *” And for other
bewildering reasons, OP-20-G depended upon
the Bureau of Engineering for the design, pur-
chasing, and manufacture ofits equipment.
Another naval branch handled contractual
details. To further complicate the bureaucratic
tangle, OP-20-G’s Research Section (Y) was the
small group charged with communications secu-
rity and, significantly, the exploitation of the lack
of security ofthe communications of other
nations. On top of that, and despite OP-20-G-Y’s
mandate, yet another research group was set up
within Engineering to explore related technologi-
cal questions. Adding to the confusion over power
and domain was the Naval Research Laboratory.
Although their core functions were under the
direct command of the CNO in the critical years of
the 1930s, communications and cryptanalysis
had a tough go of it in the navy.

Page 15
(U) A Few Men and Women for Secrecy

(U) The navy’s very small cryptologic group,
OP-20-G, began its life during World War I but
was not active until the mid-1920s.”* One reason
for its inaction was that just as it was founded, the
incredible Herbert Yardley was lobbying for the
creation of what became the famous American
Black Chamber. His group was to serve the crypt-
analytic needs ofthe army and the State
Department, and, to some unknown degree, the
navy. Stealing resources away from the private
cryptanalytic group that had been developing at
the estate ofthe flamboyant millionaire, Colonel
Fabyan, Yardley achieved some amazing victo-
ries. He broke the codes and ciphers of the major
powers. That allowed the United States to predict
the bargaining positions of the important players
inthe naval arms limitation negotiations of the
1920s. Yardley work made him some good
friends but also some enemies. A few rash deci-
sions onhis part also led tothe closing of his
Chamber in 1929 and the transfer of its files to the
army’s old code organization under William
Friedman. Yardley then decided to take one of the
most fateful steps inthe history of American
cryptanalysis. He published a book that told the
when, what, and why of American cryptanalytic
success. One horrible consequence was that the
Japanese began tochange all their code and
cipher systems.””

(U) OP-20-G did not receive much official
navy support. Until the mid-1920s, when it came
under the command of a young and bright officer,
Laurance F. Safford, itwas almost ashadow
organization. Safford arrived just in time to take
advantage of the “acquisition” of a copy of part of
Japan’s secret naval code. The code proved
invaluable, and OP-20-G began providing critical
information tothe navy. But that did not mean
recognition of the potentials of communications
intelligence or adequate funding. “G” might not
have survived if it had not been for a supersecret
fund set up at the end of World War I.

Page 16

(U) OP-20-G’s interactions with the Office of
Naval Intelligence were, at times, ones of strain as
well as frustrating dependency. ONI did much of
the needed dirty work to obtain codebooks and
information about cipher machines,*° and it had
the responsibility for interpreting the intentions
of America’s enemies. But the ONI and OP-20-G
were bureaucratically separate, and at key times
there was mistrust. “G” also had less than satis-
factory relations with naval commanders. The use
of “G’s” information was dependent upon the
decisions oflocal commanders, and OP-20-G
relied upon their willingness to supply intercepts
to Washington. Even serving only a technical
cryptanalytic role was difficult for “G.” It took
many years for itto acquire any control of what
radio systems were to be monitored.

(U) Captain |
Laurance F. 7

Safford,
USN

 

(U) The Search for Pure Cryptanalysis

(U) Through his academic and corporate con-
tacts, Hooper learned of the potentials of mecha-
nized automatic control and ofthe increasingly
mathematical nature of science and cryptanaly-
sis. His awareness of the expanding reach of sta-
tistical techniques, the potentials of high-speed

—TOP SECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSA AUS CAN -GBR-AND-NZEHKI—
FOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL-TO USA AUS-CAN-GBR-ANE-NELE

calculators, and the use of light-sensitive devices
in astronomy were perhaps sharpened by visits
and discussions with Vannevar Bush.*" Whatever
the particular source of his knowledge, Hooper
believed that the new electric and mechanical
ciphering devices introduced by the major pow-
ers, including the United States, would force
cryptanalysts to become statisticians. They would
have to perform seemingly impossible feats of
calculation to penetrate the ciphers produced by
such complex machines asthe Kryha and the
Enigma.?*

(U) Assoon ashe assumed command over
Communications, OP-20-G informed Hooper of
its progress against the cipher machines. The
cryptanalysts were quite proud of their secret and
clever techniques, ones they thought were essen-
tial because of the impracticality of a pure mathe-
matical approach.** Although they employed sta-
tistical techniques, they had effective short cuts
such as finding a copy of a secret message sent in
aknown code; locating often repeated phrases
(cribs); or uncovering the pattern of the way an
enemy announced the wheel settings for a cipher
machine network. They were also quite proud of
their craftsmen’s tools, such as paper wheels, long
strips of wood with alphabets painted on them,
and overlay sheets with punched holes for attack-
ing ciphers. But Hooper and his new right-hand
man, Joseph Wenger, were not impressed by the
tricks, and they thought that OP-20-G’s technolo-
gy, ifnot methods, were woefully behind the
times. In late 1930 Hooper suggested to OP-20-G
and the Bureau of Engineering that they begin to
develop automated cryptanalytic machines and,
by implication, to formalize their approach to
analysis. *4

(U) Hooper wanted machines that would free
OP-20-G from tricks and dependencies and that
would allow the use of advanced mathematics.
Those machines would have tobe innovative
because the new cipher devices presented crypt-
analysts with problems far different from those of
code systems. Codes were secret lists of words (or

“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TOUSA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZUIAT

(combinations of numbers) that stood for other
words. In contrast, cipher machines dynamically
changed letters into different ones with no pre-
dictable relationship between the original and the
cipher letters. The limited vocabulary of a code
meant that acquiring a copy of its codebook was
an effective solution, unlike the situation with
sophisticated cipher machines in which having a
copy ofthe enemy’s machine was only a small
step toward reading messages. The key method
an analyst used to solve a code was to identify the
relationships between a particular code word and
other words. Correlation analysis and the use of a
decoded word to predict the meaning of another
were viable methods.

(U) The new cipher systems demanded less
obvious approaches. The cipher system design-
ers’ goal during the 1920s and 1930s was to avoid
the meaning embedded in any code system. The
American Hebern cipher machine and _ its
European cousins, such as Enigma, took the old
principle of random substitution of one letter for
another to a new level. They went far beyond the
centuries-old cipher tables and handy substitu-
tion algorithms.

(U) All ofthe new machines relied upon sets
of wired rotors (or relay analogs of them) whose
internal electrical connections produced a unique
substitution cycle of such complexity and length
that it could be penetrated only through time con-
suming analysis of forbidding amounts of data.
Unless the operators of the encryption machines
made a mistake, or the cipher breakers had a con-
stant source of information on the settings of the
cipher wheels, incredible amounts of calculation
were needed for pure cryptanalysis. Hooper was
sure that the growing use ofthe new cipher
machines and the shortage of experienced crypt-
analysts meant an end tothe power of informal
methods. He saw no alternative but to develop
formal techniques and advanced machines.

(U)} More than an abstract faith in scientific
cryptanalysis led toHooper’s drive for new

Page 17
“FOP-SECRETHEOMINTHREL-FO-USA—AUS-CAN-OBI- and -NZLH

machines. There were very practical reasons. “G”
had tobe made independent and ready for an
emergency. Older methods, for either codes or
ciphers, demanded too many experienced code-
breakers who had spent years working on partic-
ular systems and on information supplied to OP-
20-G byothers such as Naval Intelligence.
Automation and formal procedures would have to
substitute for professional skill and experience as
well as the old codebreaker’s standby, intuition.

(U) But in 1930 the navy’s bureaucracy and
even the crew at OP-20-G were less than accept-
ing of formal analysis and machinery. The code-
breakers at OP-20-G were aware ofthe emer-
gence ofthe new ciphering devices and, in fact,
were building their own versions as well as tack-
ling the systems of other nations. Because of their
direct experience with automatic enciphering
devices, Hooper’s September 1930 “suggestion”
about methods and automation was not too well
received. OP-20-G’s principal civilian cryptana-
lyst, Agnes Meyer Driscoll, did not like the idea at
all. Additionally, the cryptanalysts felt insulted
because Hooper’s request contained an implicit
criticism oftheir work and skills. They thought
that formal methods, while helpful, would never
replace an experienced codebreaker. And their
years of work had taught them that decryption
was usually dependent upon some type of infor-
mal initial entry into asystem, whether itbe a
psychological insight, atheft of materials, or the
transmission of a message in both clear and enci-
phered form.* In addition to the codebreakers’
distrust of those who proposed unrealistic meth-
ods and machines, the small OP-20-G staff was
too busy analyzing Japanese code systems to deal
with methodological speculations. *

(U) Hooper thought he would eventually
tempt OP-20-G into applying formal methods by
presenting it with ademonstration device.
Hooper soon arranged tohave the Bureau of
Engineering create anew section for advanced
code and signal research *” and then made sure
that someone who would pursue his goals filled

Page 18

the post. A young officer who had been one of the
first students in OP-20-G, who had experience as
a seagoing communications officer, and who was
already a protege of Hooper, was selected. Joseph
Wenger, a thirty-year-old
Annapolis graduate,
followed Hooper’s
cues and began a
search for new
technologies
for all aspects
of communi-
cations with,
of course, an
eye open for
new devices
for ciphering
and decipher-
ing messages.
With some inter-
ruptions caused by
shifting naval assign-
ments, Wenger con-
tinued that search
through the 1930s
and 1940s, and hebecame the driving force
behind what became the most technically
advanced cryptanalytic agency in the world by the
late 1940s.38

 
 
  
 
   

(U) Joseph

(VU) From Electronics to Electromechanics

(U) Inthe early 1930s Hooper’s academic
contacts turned him towards something much
more innovative, the electromechanical tabulat-
ing machines built by companies such as IBM and
Powers. Hooper successfully prodded the Chief of
Naval Operations into sending a very specific and
strong directive tothe Bureau of Engineering in
late 1931.89 Itordered the Bureau to devote
resources to study the new optical sorters and
special devices for blind reading and came close
to demanding that such technologies be used to
build a deciphering device.*° The CNO’s mandate
included more than cryptanalytic investigations;
it was a signal to Hooper to intensify his efforts to

—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL FO USA AUS CAN-GBR-AND-NZEE—
~TOP-GEGREFICOMINTHREL-TO USA, AUS, CAN, GER AND NZLIXT

link science tothe navy. Under pressure from
Hooper, the Bureau provided Wenger with the
money needed to make a grand tour of America’s
research laboratories. During his visits, Wenger
encountered fantastic new technologies that had
at least long-term promise for solving the difficult
cryptanalytic problems, but most seemed to
demand a protracted and expensive development
period.” Wenger was especially disappointed
when he realized that optics and electronics were
not quite ready to produce a cryptanalytic
machine.

(U) Perhaps because of that and because of a
sudden realization by OP-20-G that it would need
some type of mechanical aids, Wenger turned his
attention toa more established technology. The
Hollerith and Powers electromechanical tabulat-
ing and sorting machines were evolving into quite
sophisticated devices by the late 1920s. In addi-
tion, they were machines that were immediately
available for use and were commercially pro-
duced. Wenger examined the Remington-Rand
Powers tabulators used by OP-20-G in 1932 and
did enough research to allow Hooper to again, but
more authoritatively, suggest that OP-20-G
investigate them. It was difficult for the officer in
charge of OP-20-G, Laurance Safford, to ignore
Hooper’s urging any longer.** But Hooper’s grand
dream suffered atemporary yet important set-
back.

(U) Just as Wenger was exploring the various
technical possibilities, it was discovered that the
Japanese had replaced their Red Code with a
completely revised set that could not be penetrat-
ed. Perhaps because of Yardley’s indiscretions,
seven years of work onthe previous code had.
become valueless! OP-20-G’s codebreakers knew
they would be unlikely to obtain acopy ofthe
Blue Japanese code and the three other new sys-
tems *° and decided totake onthe formidable
task of breaking the code through pure methods.
The Japanese continued to use the old type of
superencipherment, the modular addition of ran-
dom numbers to the code groups, so it was a rel-

TOR-SECRETICOMINTHREL—-TFO-UGA-AUG-GAN CERIO RNE NZEIDET

atively easy target. But the code itself, Wenger
knew, would demand years of work. Over
100,000 words had to be decoded. Such an effort
called for either vastly increased manpower or
mechanical aides.*4 Everyone knew that “G” was
unlikely to be allocated more men.

(U) Inearly 1932 OP-20-G’s cryptanalysts
studied Wenger’s tabulator survey and decided to
select the type centered upon electrical rather
than mechanical reading ofcards. Seeing
Remington-Rand’s system as inflexible, they hur-
ried to rent the electromechanical IBM tabulating
devices, ones built to handle alphabetic charac-
ters aswell asnumbers. The punch card era
seemed to have begun at OP-20-G.

(U) Then the navy hierarchy declared that it
was unwilling to fund the experiment! Safford
and Wenger did not give up. OP-20-G pressured
the Bureau of Engineering to scrape some funds
from its already slim budget,* but the Bureau
was able to raise only afew hundred dollars, not
several thousand, to start the project. It contin-
ued to piece together small amounts during the
1930s to support the tabulators. But it always felt
that OP-20-G did not fully appreciate its efforts.*°
Only a machine or two arrived at OP-20-G, and
their experimental use, which soon turned into a
necessity inthe eyes of many at OP-20-G, sur-
vived only as a near underground activity.

(U) Despite the hand-to-mouth funding of its
few machines, the OP-20-G tabulator crew con-
tinued with its work and made major contribu-
tions tothe penetration ofthe new Japanese
codes. The navy also explored new ways to store
data on IBM cards, and during the war it helped
develop special tabulating machines.

(U) Ironically, OP-20-G’s early 1930s tabu-
lator-related achievements had a negative influ-
ence. Although the search for cryptanalytic tech-
nology and methods had been motivated by
Hooper’s deep fears concerning the new automat-

Page 19
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUSCAN-GBR wmd-NZE I —

icciphering machines, including Britain’s,*” the
crisis caused by the change in Japan’s older code
system shifted attention to more immediate prob-
lems and forced acommitment to available
devices. The more sophisticated machine options
were dropped in favor of the tabulators. The tab-
ulators were well suited to many decoding proce-
dures, especially those calling for sorting and,
later, collating operations, but they were not the
mathematical ortruly high-speed statistical
devices needed tobreak into the new cipher
machines.

(U) The leasing of a few tabulators did not link
IBM to any long-term commitments to OP-20-G
or Engineering. Although IBM played a signifi-
cant role in certain extensions of electromechani-
cal technology before and during World War IL, it
did little truly far-ranging research for the crypt-
analysts during the 1930s. While the use of tabu-
lators was agreat step inthe history of crypt-
analysis, the commitment to tabulators took away
much ofthe incentive to make the great techno-
logical leap Hooper had desired. The very hard-
pressed staff at OP-20-G had more than enough
to do to learn how to exploit the IBM equipment.

(U) Then, when older cryptanalytic methods
triumphed over Japan’s new cipher machine, the
Red, there was little excuse for an emergency
development program. The success against Red
undermined arguments that an advanced in-
house developmental group should be estab-
lished within the Bureau.

(U) A Young Man for the Future

(U) Something else helped totum the navy
away from Hooper’s plans for truly advanced
automated cryptanalysis. Joseph Wenger,
Hooper’s man in the Bureau or Engineering, who
had become an ardent believer in the value of sci-
ence and technology, was returned to sea duty in
mid-1932. He had supplied Hooper’s grand out-
line for communications with the details needed
for OP-20-G’s technical and organizational

Page 20

future.** As significant, while onsea duty, he
refined and codified the important method later
known astraffic analysis (T/A). He combined
direction finding, callsigns, and traffic flows into
a highly effective tool.*? To prove the worth of the
approach, hereconstructed the Japanese naval
maneuvers without being able toread the con-
tents of the radio signals.5° Although not appreci-
ated by outsiders, even Hooper during the early
1930s, T/A became amajor factor inthe

American victory in World War IL.

(U) The Dream Postponed, Again

(U) Wenger’s transfer tosea duty in 1932
allowed him to help unravel Japan’s naval tactics
and to refine America’s eavesdropping capability
inthe Pacific, but it was near devastating to the
cause of automating code and cipher breaking.
Almost as bad for Hooper’s cause was Laurance
Safford’s assignment tosea for four years. His
absence until 1936 stretched the resources of OP-
20-G to the breaking point and left Hooper with-
out an in-house advocate. When Safford returned
to Washington, the growing crisis in the Pacific,
including the sudden change of a major Japanese
code in 1936, left him with notime for experi-
mentation. Despite OP-20-G’s dependency on the
Bureau of Engineering for hardware develop-
ment, the engineering branch was left without a
spokesman for advanced cryptographic technolo-
gy. What men Engineering could spare became
involved in the difficulties of inventing and man-
ufacturing electromechanical encryption devices.
The bureau, along with the Naval Research
Laboratory, also faced increasing demands and
few thanks for radio and radar developments. At
the same time, OP-20-G became deluged with
new and more difficult code and cipher problems
as Japan carved out its Asian empire. The tiny
crew had little time for technological or mathe-
matical speculation.

FOP SECRETICOMINTIREL-TO USK, AUS, CAN, CBICAND NZCIT
—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TO USAAUS-CAN GBR ANE -NZEHT—

(U) The Dream Reborn, for a Moment

(U) It was only Wenger’s return in mid-1935
and the Roosevelt-Vinson decisions to expand the
navy that allowed Hooper to again pursue his
cryptanalytic goals. Wenger had the experience,
the energy, and the desire to restart the program,
and naval expansion hinted at the possibility of
funding.**

(U) The changes at OP-20-G in 1935 extended
to more than the renewed hopes for new research
machinery. Wenger was made the head of OP-20-
G’s new research desk. The new “Y”section was to
be devoted to the application of science to crypt-
analysis and tothe type oflong-term planning
development that the CNO was encouraging in all
parts of the service.** Then, when Safford came
back to Washington in1936, Wenger began
another round of visits to the centers of American
science and technology. Among those Hooper
visited in 1935 and then recommended to Wenger
was aman hehad known for years, Vannevar
Bush.**

(U) Bush, Wenger, and Hooper joined forces
at atime when their interests seemed to be in per-
fect harmony and when they thought they had the
resources and power to initiate and complete a
major program. Bush’s scientific status was per-
haps the major reason why Hooper looked to MIT
rather than tothe large corporations such as
National Cash Register or IBM or RCA or to the
National Bureau ofStandards for help in
automating American cryptanalysis. On a gentle-
men’s agreement, Bush began to draft a plan for
the navy, and Wenger returned to Washington
filled with enthusiasm. He was convinced that the
$10,000 consulting fee Bush expected was a great
bargain. Bush dashed off his report and submit-
ted itin the first weeks of 1936. He was able to
respond so quickly because ofthe optics-film-
electronics work he and his colleagues at MIT had
been doing for several years. Of great importance,
he had begun thinking of and lobbying for the

~FOP-GEGRETHIGOMHFHIREE FC-USA, AUS; CAN -GBRAND NZ

development ofelectronic cryptanalysis well
before 1935.°°

(U) Bush’s initial proposition was not for the
production of specific equipment. Rather, it
defined his role as that of a consultant to the navy.
He sketched the general outlines for a long-term
project centered about the creation of high-speed
optical-electronic devices which would be hun-
dreds of times more powerful than the tabulators.
He recommended that the navy design and devel-
op what became known in the intelligence com-
munity as Rapid Analytical Machines (RAM).
Everything finally seemed to be falling into place
for them and Bush in early 1936.

(U) Little Science Meets the Little Navy,
Again

(U) Hooper thought he was having Bush sub-
sidize his great plan for the navy. Bush thought
the navy would subsidize the beginnings of MIT's
calculation center and its entry into digital pro-
cessing. Wenger thought he had a set of ideas that
would launch the navy ona full-scale develop-
ment project. None ofthem realized there were
built-in conflicts. Hooper probably did not know
of the financial pressures on Bush and MIT dur-
ing the 1930s. Inturn, Bush did not suspect that
Hooper and Wenger had not convinced the navy
ofthe worth oftheir approach to introducing
innovations. ©

(U) Just asthe prospects for Bush’s center
rapidly brightened and as Hooper was receiving
signals that his comprehensive plan for all com-
munications activities would be approved, the
navy made an unexpected, critical, and disap-
pointing decision. For a second time the attempt
to revolutionize cryptanalysis seemed to have
been defeated bythe tangled navy bureaucracy
and the men Bowen called “mossbacks”! Before
Bush’s navy project truly got under way, he and
his naval allies became involved in an organiza-
tional nightmare. Bush thought freedom from
interference was essential if academia and the

Page 21
—TOP-SECRETHCOMNTIREL TO USA AUS-CAN-GBR and NZI

military were tojoin together, and he believed
that no absolute timetables and guarantees could
begiven for truly innovative work. Hooper and
Wenger agreed that heavy-handed bureaucratic
oversight would doom any creative effort.
Wenger hoped that Bush’s status and persuasive
powers would be able to break the navy bureaus’
resistance to outsiders. But the naval bureaucracy
had a different opinion.

(U) The Bureau of Engineering men very
bluntly told Hooper and Wenger that Bush’s
plans were unrealistic and his demands outra-
geous. They were soon joined by the contracting
arm ofthe navy, which declared many parts of
Hooper’s model for academic/military coopera-
tion ill advised, if not illegal. They would not give
the needed approval, and the project that could
have led to the creation of the first electronic dig-
ital data processing device seemed dead in early
1936.

(U) A Man for Statistics

(U) Just as Stanford Hooper was facing the
defeat of his hopes of creating anew technology
for cryptanalysis, another major figure in the his-
tory of American codebreaking was becoming
entangled with automation. William F. Friedman,
the head of the army’s cryptologic section, finally
convinced the army to allow him to use tabula-
tors. Although their introduction into the army’s
Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) came almost five
years after Hooper and Wenger had brought
them into OP-20-G, the arrival ofthe IBM
machines at the SIS offices seemed revolutionary.

(U) In 1929-30, just as Hooper was trying to
refurbish naval communications, the army had to
fill the void left by the disintegration of Yardley’s
Black Chamber. Instead of creating an entirely
new organization, itgave additional mandates
and some additional resources to the man it had
previously hired to safeguard its own communi-
cations, William F. Friedman. Unlike Wenger or
Hooper, Friedman had not come tocode work

Page 22

through the military; rather, he stumbled into it
because of his college courses in genetics.

(U) The son of a Hungarian-Russian-Jewish
immigrant, Friedman attended an advanced
technical high school where he delved into elec-
trical engineering. But his interest in the new field
of scientific agriculture led him toone of
America’s centers of applied science, Cornell
University. After finishing heavily statistical
courses in genetics, and gaining experience in

research at one of the pres-
tigious Carnegie cen-
ters, Friedman
decided to post-
pone gaining a
Ph.D. He want-
ed and needed
ajob. He
accepted a
position asa
research
geneticist
for one of
America’s most
influential agri-
cultural business-
men, Colonel George
Fabyan. Assigned to
Fabyan’s estate at
Riverbank, Illinois,
just as Europe was becoming engulfed in war,
Friedman soon found himself busy with Fabyan’s
private cryptanalytic projects rather than with the
development ofhybrid cottons. When Fabyan
offered his staff and his estate to the United States
government for cryptanalytic training for the war
effort, Friedman’s future was set.

  
  
  
  

(U0) William F. Friedman

(U) His energies were turned to applying the
new statistical techniques he learned at Cornell to
cryptanalysis. His cryptoattacks and his training
methods became legendary. As a result, after the
war the United States Army asked him to estab-
lish acode agency. Because Herbert Yardley’s
Black Chamber held the mandate for listening to

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USK, AUS;CAN-GBRAND-NZEH—
~TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL-TOUSA-AUS-CAN-OBR-AND- NZL —

the communications of others, Friedman was
asked to focus on the protection of army commu-
nications and on the preparation of training man-
uals for wartime cryptanalysis. Although concen-
trating on those tasks, Friedman did not abandon
code and cipher breaking. He was called on to test
various proposed systems, including cipher
machines the navy thought of purchasing. *”

(U) Friedman’s role began to change in 1929
when Yardley’s group was under political threat.
The army decided to found its own operational
cryptanalytic group. It gave Friedman the funds
he needed to hire a group of young civilians, and
itgave him Yardley’s files. Perhaps it gave him
access to Yardley’s old sources of intercepts.
Friedman trained his young men in codebreaking
and made sure they learned about formal statis-
tics and foreign languages by enrolling them ata
local university. Meanwhile, his wife, also a
Riverbank alumna, became the cryptologist for
the Coast Guard.®* While her crew worked on the
clandestine messages of rum runners and other
criminals, Friedman’s team examined as much
diplomatic and military traffic as it could obtain
through the very limited intercept capabilities of
the army.”

(U) Together, the Friedmans blended practi-
cal experience with statistics todevelop more
powerful cryptanalytic tools. Although Friedman
did not attempt to make the direct links with elite
academics that Hooper was forging for OP-20-G,
he was proud ofthe “scientific” character of his
methods.

(U) Those statistical methods and knowledge
of many ofthe machine activities at “G” soon led
Friedman toseek ameans ofautomating the
army’s codemaking and codebreaking work.
Beginning afew years later than the navy,
Friedman tried to acquire IBM tabulators for his
office. He faced almost as many frustrations as
Hooper and Wenger but finally acquired some
machines in late 1934.°° By 1937 he and his crew
had developed several tabulator methods that

“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-UGA AUS, GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHAT-

became classic means of cryptanalytic attack, and
they began to turn the tabulators into more spe-
cialized cryptologic tools. He and one of his young
men, Frank Rowlett, invented an attachment for
the tabulating equipment that allowed it to gener-
ate “random” code.”

(U) Friedman began to develop visions ofa
greater technological future for cryptanalysis.
But, unlike Hooper and Wenger, he did not seek
help from outsiders, atleast not inthe 1930s.
Perhaps that was because his research ambitions,
even more than “G’s,” were smothered by the mil-
itary bureaucracy. Friedman did not have a
Hooper torun interference for him with the
Signal Corps. For whatever the reasons,
Friedman’s automation efforts were less adven-
turous and more limited than Wenger’s. He had
no Vannevar Bush and no ties to the nation’s sci-
entific elite.

(U) Inthe mid-1930s Friedman concentrated
on plans for putting teletype tape readers, relays,
and plugboards together in various combina-
tions. Some of those became outlines of his own
versions of Index of Coincidence machines and
isomorph locators (pattern finders).®* And, at the
end ofthe decade, he somehow found the money
to hire an MIT electrical engineer, Leo Rosen.
Rosen had a solid background in electronic tubes
and circuits. Perhaps Friedman hired him with an
eye to beginning his own version ofthe navy’s
electronic RAM program.

(VU) Science and the Navy Need Other
Friends

(U) Inearly twentieth century America, cor-
porations and private foundations were more
important than government or higher education.
Asa result, corporate research policies and deci-
sions by the leaders of the philanthropic founda-
tions played a determining role inthe history of
Bush’s and Hooper’s crusades. Decisions by
Eastman-Kodak, AT&T, IBM, and especially the
National Cash Register Company were critical to

Page 23
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USK, AUS CAN-GBIt ard NZL

the emergence ofthe machines for cryptanalysis
and for the library. As late as the 1930s, the sci-
entists’ lobbying efforts to make pure science one
ofthe targets of federal support were failures.
They were rebuffed by Congress as well as by the
usually open-handed Franklin D. Roosevelt. As a
result, there was no pure science program in the
nation.

(UV) The Private World of Science

(U) During the first forty years of the twenti-
eth century, the nation’s scientists looked to two
sets of foundations, those created by Andrew
Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller. Their fortunes,
generated by the technological revolution of the
nineteenth century, became the fuel for American
academic science.

(U) Their decision inthe 1920s to finance
research within the elite American universities
was critical to the history of American science. As
important, they created the first bureaucracies
designed to manage long-term, very expensive
scientific programs. Those programs accounted
for perhaps as much as 90 percent of such activi-
ty during the 1920s and 1930s, and their man-
agers became key players in the shaping of scien-
tific institutions during and after World War IL.°?
The administrators of the 1930s private founda-
tions, including Vannevar Bush, became the over-
lords of 1940s science and then became the lead-
ers of the early Cold War scientific and high-tech
agencies.

(U) As outside research became more attrac-
tive, the Carnegie and Rockefeller foundations
turned to the old national science institutions for
help. The National Academy of Sciences and the
National Research Council were energized with
foundation monies and began to act as scientific
go-betweens. The NRC managed many projects
for Carnegie, advised other foundations about
national needs, and recommended worthy scien-
tists.°* After those first steps, the foundations
began tohelp some individual academic

Page 24

researchers just as MIT’s new president launched
his faculty, including Vannevar Bush, on a sweep
for research funds. Very important to Bush were
the decisions by one ofthe new young adminis-
trators atthe Rockefeller Foundation, Warren
Weaver.

(U) A Man for Applied Mathematics and
Information

(U) Warren Weaver was one ofthose new
bright scientific men brought to the foundations
to reformulate policy. Central to Weaver's plan
for the revamped natural science division of the
Rockefeller Foundation was the creation of
instruments to encourage the use of mathematics
in every field. By the mid-i930s Bush convinced
Weaver that the world of science was ready for
new generations of Analysers. Then Weaver suc-
cessfully lobbied his superiors for a $10,000
study grant for Bush’s proposed partially elec-
tronic machine. Just ayear later, he secured an
astounding $85,000 for the Rockefeller Analyser
project at MIT.® Half a dozen years later, Weaver
again showed his faith in MIT when he funded
another huge computer project at the Institute,
one for anelectronic digital programmed com-
puter.

(U) American Science and the War — the
NDRC

(U) Only afew in America realized that
Germany was inventing a new type of high tech-
nology warfare and that fundamental science
might be needed to combat the horrors of atomic
weapons and long-range bombers. Vannevar
Bush and his close scientific friends were among
those few. Never a man to sit by and let the world
determine his fate, Bush sought ways to ensure a
flow of academic contributions to the war effort.*”
Bush energized what became one of America’s
first modern science interest groups and began to
lobby the government to support a wide range of
new programs. Bush convinced President
Roosevelt to create the powerful and well-funded

FOR-GEGRETHGOMINFHREL-TO-USA-AUS--CAN-GBIOANE NZL
FOR-SEGRETFHGOMINFHREL-FO-USH,AUS-CAN, GBR AND NZEIAT

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC)
in June 1940.Within a year, its scope and its pow-
ers toinitiate and control projects were vastly
expanded. The new Office of Scientific Research
and Development was adream come true for
Bush. It was almost the perfect science founda-
tion for elite American academics.

(U) The NDRC was responsible to the presi-
dent, not the military or Congress, and its scien-
tists could determine what projects to begin or
end. Hundreds of millions of dollars came under
the control of the NDRC. The NDRC and elite sci-
ence were subsidizing science as well as potential
weapons. Administrators of foundation science,
who were friends of the universities, were select-
ed to head the major branches of the NDRC. The
old Carnegie-Rockefeller circle, which included
the leading men from the leading universities,
moved from private to military philanthropy dur-
ing the war and, along with Bush, were able to cir-
cumvent the “mossbacks” in the military and the
older organizations of science. In the fall of 1940,
the NDRC began to explore defense technologies
that were too speculative for the military or its
older industrial allies. Of great importance was
the computer effort headed by Warren Weaver.

(U) Because of Weaver’s mathematical back-
ground and his prewar experience evaluating
computing proposals, Bush made him head of the
mathematical and scientific instrument section of
the NDRC. One of his first chores was to develop
a program to solve technical problems created by
the advance ofGerman military technology.
There was avital need for automatic control of
antiaircraft weapons, high-speed counters for
ballistic tests, and scientific instruments to moni-
tor atomic processes.°* Ineach case Weaver
turned to electronic solutions. He called upon all
those known to have worked in electronic count-
ing and launched a program for the development
of special purpose devices. He soon had the com-
puter builders George Stibitz and Sam Caldwell to
help him supervise the work. As important, he
was able to pursue another opportunity. He cre-

FOP-SEGRETHCGHINTHIREE-FG-USA,AUS-CAN-GBR AND NZL

ated acenter for applied mathematics. It would
permanently change academic mathematics in
America.

(U) The NDRC was a blessing to Bush and his
academic friends, but to others it was a politicized
and unnecessary organization that threatened the
military research agencies such asthe Naval
Research Laboratory.® To Admiral Bowen, Bush
was leading agroup bent on playing favorites
among the military services and the universities.
He soon concluded that the NDRC worked to the
disadvantage ofthe navy. To Admiral Hooper,
however, Bush and the NDRC appeared, at least
at the beginning, to be the only way the intelli-
gence community could acquire the advanced
machines itneeded. But computers were far
down on the NDRC list, and cryptanalysis entered
its world only because of the long chain of associ-
ations between Bush, the navy, and the corpora-
tions and universities that were atthe center of
the NDRC.

(U) Corporate Charity

(U) Vannevar Bush looked to the major cor-
porations when he began his search for support
for his calculation center inthe early 1930s.
General Electric had a research branch that was a
leader in applied mathematics, but it decided to
keep most of its work in-house rather than make
any large investments in Bush’s _ center.
Paralleling General Electric’s reaction, Western
Electric and Bell Laboratories were willing to sup-
ply critical parts for the Rockefeller Analyser and
to give advice onthe type oftools and services
mathematicians desired. But they did not offer
major financial support to Bush’s 1930s projects.

(U) The Eastman-Kodak Corporation ofthe
1930s was not asgenerous with MIT as its
founder had been, but it remained avery good
friend of the Institute. Of even greater importance
to the nation was Bush’s relationship with a cor-
poration that did not have areputation for
research. Why Bush became so close to a compa-

Page 25
FOR-SECRETHIGCOMNTHREL—TFO-USAAUS-CAN-GBR-and-NzttiKd

ny that made cash registers is explained by Bush’s
friendship with the famous team of Colonel
Edward A. Deeds and Charles Boss Kettering.
That friendship linked National Cash Register,
MIT, the NDRC, and the Ultra secret.”

(U) Bush first came in contact with Deeds and
Kettering through the institutions of American
science. Bush and Deeds served on important
advisory committees that steered aeronautical
research in the United States, such as the precur-
sor to NASA, the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics. In 1931 Deeds consented to serve
aschairman ofthe board of National Cash
Register (NCR).

(U) For someone trying to rebuild NCR, the
best opportunities were those that demanded a
technology not found inthe corporation’s offer-
ings of the 1920s. NCR needed new machines to
move deeper into information processing.
Inventory, retail sales, and personnel manage-
ment, for example, had demands met only by
devices that had some sort of large-scale memory.
The failure to create offerings to compete with
IBM was one reason for the demand for athor-
ough shake-up at National Cash Register in 1936.

(U) While Deeds slashed expenditures in
many parts of the company, he increased alloca-
tions for research. He pushed the efforts to move
NCR into the electrified bank-posting and billing
machine business, and he looked forward to find-
ing atechnology to challenge IBM’s grip on auto-
mated file management. Previously, Deeds had
applauded NCR’s very quiet acquisition ofthe
rights toa fantastic machine for the era, the
Hofgaard relay computer.” Both the 1930 and
1938 NCR relay computer patent applications
cited amachine with anarchitecture quite like
that of the modern serial computer. It had a cen-
tral processing unit and addressed storage. It per-
formed at least three of the four basic arithmetic
functions and had the ability to calculate, store,
and print totals and subtotals for many different
items. Although Hofgaard’s machine was quite

Page 26

promising, Deeds ordered NCR’s research direc-
tor, Harry N. Williams, to drop the project and
investigate other technological options. Deeds
was probably advised to do so by Vannevar Bush,
who was aware of the Hofgaard patents and who
had just completed his survey of computing tech-
nologies.”* Bush advised a jump into electronics.
The men atNCR_ learned much about the
progress of electronics and film-optical combina-
tions in scientific measurement from Bush. They
were certainly interested inthe MIT work on
smaller and more reliable tubes because of the
value oflow power and fast miniature tubes for
machine design.”? Their positive reaction to the
operation at MIT resulted in an endorsement of
Bush’s suggestion touse the Institute asa

resource for NCR.

(U) The Navy Comes in Second

(U) After all the disappointing appeals to the
foundations and the troubled negotiations with
the navy, Bush finally gained a pliable and gener-
ous sponsor. Bush turned to Deeds requesting
money for the proposed universal electronic com-
puter, the revolutionary Rapid Arithmetical
Machine. Explaining that it was still on paper, but
underscoring that other work had already led to
the building of successful electronic circuits, Bush
was able to get Deeds’s attention.”4 The first dis-
cussion about the electronic computer may have
started with hints that MIT could immediately
build an electronic calculator for NCR. But the
beleaguered Rockefeller project led Caldwell and
Bush to scale down their ambitions. Bush, already
very busy, had alimited role inthe Rapid
Arithmetical project. He restricted himself to
writing overviews ofits architecture. Like the
other projects atthe institute, the Rapid
Arithmetical Machine fell behind schedule.

(U) Despite his patience and Caldwell’s prom-
ises, Deeds could not leave the future of his com-
pany inthe hands ofan academic institution.
Following Bush’s suggestion, NCR established its
own electronics research laboratory in the spring

TOP. SECRETIUCOMINTUREL TOUSA_AUS, CAN WGBR-AND-NZE4—
—FOR-SEGRETIGOMNTHREE-FO-USA AUS CAN-CBR AND NZDIXT—

of 1938,” headed by Joseph Desch. Desch and his
few assistants taught themselves about the latest
electronic developments.” He completed an elec-
tronic digital calculator by 1940 and explored the
application of electronics to many types of busi-
ness machines.”

(VU)
Joseph Desch

(Courtesy of
the NCR
Archive at the
Montgomery
County, Ohio,
Historical
Society)

 

(U) Then just as Desch’s work was leading to
the construction of hardware, the crisis in Europe
and Deeds’s patriotism ended Desch’s commer-
cial projects. His expertise in electronics and, as
important, his unique manufacturing abilities,
attracted the attention ofthe men in Weaver's
group atthe National Defense Research
Committee. Before the end of1940, Desch
became part ofthe rise of Big Science. Within
another year, he became central to the history of
Bush’s Comparator and to OP-20-G’s future.

(WU) Notes

1.(U) Karl L. Wildes and Nilo A. Lindgren, A
Century of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at MIT, 1882-1982 (Cambridge: MIT Press,
1985), 7. Samuel C. Prescott, When MIT Was Boston
Tech, 1861-1916 (Cambridge: Technology Press of
MIT, 1954).

—TOR-SECRETICOMINTREL-FO-USA-AUE-GAN-GBRANB-NZEINT

2.(U) James M.Nyce and Paul Kahn (ed.),
From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the
Mind’s Machine (Boston: Academic Press, 1991).

3.(U) Larry Owens, “Straight Thinking:
Vannevar Bush and the Culture of American
Engineering,” (Ph.D. Thesis, Princeton University,
1987). Larry Owens, “Vannevar Bush and the
Differential Analyser: The Text and Context of an
Early Computer,” Technology and Culture 27 (1986):
63-95. Montgomery _B. Meigs, “Managing
Uncertainty: Vannevar Bush, James B.Conant and
the Development ofthe Atomic Bomb, 1940-45,”
(Ph.D. Thesis, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
1982). Stanley Goldberg, “Inventing aClimate of
Opinion: Vannevar Bush and the Decision to Build
the Bomb,” ISIS 83 (1992): 429. G. Pascal Zachary,
“Vannevar Bush Backs the Bomb,” Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists 48 (1992): 24.

4.(U) James M. Nyce and Paul Kahn (ed.), From
Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the
Mind’s Machine (Boston: Academic Press, 1991),
235-353, especially, Linda C.Smith, “Memex as an
Image of Potentiality Revisited,” 261-286. Adele
Goldberg (ed.), A History of Personal Workstations
(Reading, Mass.: ACM Press, 1988). On Bush’s sci-
ence policies in the post-WWII era, Daniel J. Kevles’s
preface toVannevar Bush, Science: The Endless
Frontier (Washington: NSF, circa 1992), ix.

5.(U) Bush’s patent history was traced through
the historical files at the U.S. Patent Office’s Crystal
City, Virginia, facility.

6.(U) Bernard Williams, “Computing With
Electricity, 1935-1945,"(Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Kansas, 1984), 48.

7.(U) Otto J.Scott, The Creative Ordeal: The
Story of Raytheon (New York: Atheneum Press,
1974).

8.(U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces ofthe Action.
NDRC and its successor, the OSRD, were very elitist
and Big Science oriented. James Phinney Baxter,
Scientists Against Time (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1968), and Irvin Stewart, Organizing
Scientific Research for War: The Administrative
History ofthe Office of Scientific Research and
Development (Boston: Little-Brown, 1948).

g.(U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action.

Page 27
—TEP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-U6 A -AUG-GaN-GBR-ene-NZLi4

10. (U) Larry Owens, “Straight Thinking:
Vannevar Bush and the Culture of American
Engineering,” 289-90.

11. (U) An overview of the results of his attempts,
from the 1930s tothe postwar era isfound in MIT
Archives, AC4 Boxes 30 and 36, Center of Analysis.

12. (U) Vannevar Bush, “Instrumental Analysis,”
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 42
(October, 1936): 649. Karl L.Wildes and Nilo A.
Lindgren, A Century of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at MIT, 1882-1982, 230-3.

13. (U) Smithsonian History of Computers
Interviews, “Gordon S. Brown,” January 27, 1970,
provides a fascinating overview of many of the efforts
at the Institute in the 1920s and 1930s.

14. (U) There were several companies that made
similar devices for gun control systems for the mili-
tary, however. See the Barber-Coleman and
Hannibal Ford companies. Note that Ford was inter-
ested in building aversion ofan analyser and, per-
haps, donating itto Cornell University. See press
releases by the Sperry Corperation, “Hannibal Ford,”
“ford Instrument Company.” On Ford and Bush,
Rockefeller Archives, RGi2.1 Diaries of Warren
Weaver, March 3, 1935.

15. (U) We have yet to have a technical history of
the “tab” era that shows how they were used, but gen-
eral overviews of needs and demand are found in
James R. Beniger, The Control Revolution
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1986),

and inthe brilliant Martin Campbell-Kelley,
“Industrial Assurance and Large-scale Data
Processing,” Technohistory of Electrical

Information Technology (Munchen: Deutsches

Museum, 1991).

16. (U) Irene S. Farkas-Conn, From Documen-
tation to Information Science (New York:
Greenwood Press, 1990).

17. (U)} Larry Owens, “Straight Thinking:
Vannevar Bush and the Culture of American
Engineering,” 78. Avaluable insight into the new
Analyzer project isCharles Babbage Institute,
Interview by William Aspray with Dr. Frank M.
Verzuh, February 20 and 24, 1984.

18. (U) Bush’s acceptance of digital calculation,
as evidenced by the plans for the electronic calcula-

Page 28

tor, the Selector, and the Comparator, calls into the
question the thesis that he was wedded to analog
models and calculation. See Larry Owens, “Vannevar
Bush and the Differential Analyser: The Text and
Context ofan Early Computer,” Technology and
Culture 27 (1986): 63-95.

19. (U) NSA RAM File, Hooper to OP-20-G,
“Cryptanalytic Machines,” September 26, 1930, and
Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford Caldwell
Hooper, Box 18, Hooper to Secret Naval Board, “Staff
Corps Personnel,” February 7, 1936.

20. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford
Caldwell Hooper, “Memorandum on Johns Hopkins
Group Visit,” November 3, 1037, Box 17.

21. (U) Rockefeller Archives RG12.1, Diaries of
Warren Weaver, “Visit of Hooper and Lemmon,”
June 10, 1938.

22. (U) Wheeler, Yankee from the West, 18-20,
386, and Farago, The Game ofthe Foxes, 477-8.

23. (U) The ONR became a blessing tothe uni-
versities after World War Uwhen itreplaced the
NDRC tosubsidize research until the National
Science Foundation was created. Harvey M.
Sapolsky, Science and the Navy: The History of the
Office of Naval Research (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1990). The ONR is put into per-
spective in Thomas A. Guniston and Roger L. Geiger
(ed.), Research and Higher Education: The United
Kingdom and the United States (Buckingham: Open
University Press, 1989), 3-17.

24. (U) Paolo E.Coletta (ed), The American
Secretaries of the Navy, Vol. 11, 1913-72 (Annapolis:
Naval Institute Press, 1980), 663, dates the height of
the conflict in 1933-34. But Harvey M. Sapolsky,
“Academic Science and the Military: The Years Since
World War II,” in Nathan Reingold (ed.), The
Sciences inthe American Context (Washington:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1979), 379-399,
describes a longer battle.

25. (U) Harold G. Bowen, Ships, Machinery and
Mossbacks: The Autobiography of a Naval Engineer
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1954),
119-20.

26. (U) Ibid, 45. Bowen's role in the evolution of
the ONR istraced in Harvey M.Sapolsky, Science
and the Navy: The History ofthe Office of Naval

TOR SECRETUCOMINTUREL~TO-USA-AUGS-CAN;-GBR-AND-NZLIK—
-FOR-SEGRETIGOMINFHREL-FO-USA AUS, CAN GBR AND NZX T

Research (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1990).

27, (U) NARA RG457: SRH-150 “Birthday of the
Naval Security Group”; SRH-305, “The Undeclared
War: History of RI,” by Laurance Safford; SRMN-
084 “Evolution of the Navy’s Cryptologic
Organization;” and SRH-152 “Historical Review of
OP-20-G, 17 February 1944.”

28. (U) David Kahn, “Pearl Harbor and the
Inadequacy of Cryptanalysis,” Cryptologia 15 (1991):
274.

29. (U) Louis Kruh, “Tales of Yardley: Some
Sidelights toHis Career,” Cryptologia 13 (1989):
327-356. NARA RG457, SRMD-018 “Mexican
Intercept Messages 1912-1924 MI-8.” (U) NSA CCH
Series XIK, Sam Snyder, draft of proposed history
“Machines in U. S. Cryptology Before World War II,”
27June 1975. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Memoranda on SIS, Formation of Cryptanalytic
Group” from CCH Series XI K, Box 13, circa 1929-
1939.

30. (U) More and more cases of important
“acquisitions” during the 1920s and 1930s are com-
ing tolight. See Parker, Pearl Harbor Revisited:
United States Navy Communications Intelligence,
1924-1941, 12.

31. (U) Interviews and correspondence with
Waldron S. MacDonald, 1987-91. MacDonald stated
that Bush was the one that convinced the navy to
investigate highspeed devices. It is more than likely
that Bush was intouch with Hooper before 1930
about such matters. See also Library of Congress,
Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper, Box 21, August
17, 1945, “Rough Draft of Comment,” 3.

32. (U) Auseful history of the introduction of
these machines isNARA RG457, SRH-004, “The
Friedman Lectures on Cryptology.”

33. (U) Deavours and Kruh, Machine
Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis , 212, 218.
NARA RG457, “The Undeclared War: The History of
RI,” 15 November, 1943, by Laurance F. Stafford,
Captain, U.S. Navy, and SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 161. A History of
Communications Intelligence inthe United States
With Emphasis onthe United States Navy (NCVA),
12. Awonderful insight in OP-20-G’s methods is in

—TORSECREHICOMINT/ REL FOUSA—AUS-CAN—GBR-AND Natt I

Lt. L. F. Safford, “The Functions and Duties of the
Cryptologic Section, Naval Communications,”
Cryptologia , 16 (1992): 265-281.

34. (U) NSA RAM File, Hooper to OP-20-G,
“Cryptanalytic Machines,” September 26, 1930.

35. (U) Abook that overstates the case against
the historical importance of formal analysis but
which isstill useful is Nigel West, The SIGINT
Secrets: The Signals Intelligence War, 1900 to
Today, Including the Persecution of Gordon
Welchman (New York: 1986). Avery revealing and
important document for the history of OP-20-G and
American cryptanalysis is found in Louis Kruh, “Why
Was Safford Pessimistic about Breaking the German
Enigma Cipher Machine in 1942?” Cryptologia 14
(1990): 253.

36. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 80. C. A. Deavours,
“The Black Chamber: A Column: La Methode Des
Baton,” Cryptologia 4 (1980): 240-247.

37. (U) Hooper's power to do this may have been
based on the connections he established earlier in his
career when hewas the head ofthe Bureau of
Engineering’s new radio-sound division.

38. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 80. U.S. Navy-
Office of Information, Biographies Branch, 13
February 1958, “R. Adm. J. N. Wenger, USN, Ret.”

39. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G toChief of
Naval Operations, “Cryptanalytic Machines —
Photocells,” November 11, 1931.

40. (U) Photoelectric sensing for “sorting” has a
long and complex history. See, for example, the
patents of Michael Maul of Berlin dating from at least
1927 which were assigned toIBM. See U.S. patents
2000403-4. A Westinghouse engineer created an
optical card sorter that caught Hooper’s interest,
Electronics 3 (October, 1931), 157. The 1930s work of
the German, Emanuel Goldberg, who also invented
the microdot, became of great significance to Bush’s
plans after World War II. Michael K. Buckland,
“Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document Retrieval,
and Vannevar Bush’s Memex,” JASIS 43 (1992): 284.

41. (U) Among Hooper’s and Wenger’s recom-
mendations was the exploration of the new statisti-
cal-mathematical techniques being used in the

Page 29
“FOR-SEGRETICOMANTHREL-FO-UGA-AUE-CAN-GBR-and- NE

advanced sciences. Although professional mathe-
maticians were not brought into OP-20-G until the
onset of World War I (such as Howard Engstrom,
Andy Gleason, and Marshall Hall), atleast the
younger men at OP-20-G were sent back to school for
classes in statistics in the mid-i930s. NARA RG457,
SRH-355, “Naval Security Group History to World
War II,” 268. The influence of Lester Hill during the
prewar years remains to be traced.

42. (U) By the early 1930s, some scientists were
using tabulating machines for advanced calculating.
G.W. Baehne (ed.), Practical Applications of the
Punched Card Methods in Colleges and Universities
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1935) gives
an insight to some of the uses and some of the special
devices attached to the tabulators. Also useful for an
understanding of precomputer calculation are
William Aspray (ed.), Computing Before Computers
(Ames, lowa: Iowa State University Press, 1990), and
Arthur Norberg, “High Technology Calculation in the
Early 20th Century: Punched Card Machinery in
Business and Government,” Technology and Culture
31 (1990): 753.

43. (U) NSA RAM File, McClaran to Director of
Naval Communications, January 7,1032. NARA
RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group History to
World War II,” 75. The code was put into operation
in December of 1930 and, luckily for the Americans,
used until late 1938.

44. (U) The pressures on OP-20-G multiplied
because of a bizarre occurrence in 1930-31. The for-
mer head ofthe State Department’s and Signal
Corps’ cryptanalytic agency, Herbert Yardley, pub-
lished his infamous book, The American Black
Chamber .1t revealed the United States’ ability to
read various Japanese code and, perhaps, cipher sys-
tems. NARA RG457, SRH-151, “Military Study:
Communication Intelligence Research Activities,” 9.

45. (U) NSA RAM File, “McClaran to Director of
Naval Communications,” January 7, 1932.

46. (U) NSA RAM File, Huckins to Bureau of
Engineering, “IBM Rental,” May 15, 1933.

47. (U) Deavours and Kruh, Machine
Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis , 212.
Hooper was especially worried about Britain’s new
shipboard cipher machines in the early 1930s. NSA

Page 30

RAM File, Hooper to OP-20-G, “Cryptanalytic
Machines,” September 26, 1930.
48. (U} NARA RG457, SRMN-o084, “The

Evolution of the Navy's Cryptologic Organization,”
and SRH-264, “ALecture on Communications
Intelligence,” by Capt. J. N. Wenger, USN, August 14,
1946.”

49. (U} NARA RG457, SRH-151, “Military Study:
Communication Intelligence Research Activities,”
008.

50. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-083, “Military
Study of Secret Radio Calls, January 1938.”

51. (U) Howeth, History of Communications
Electronics inthe United States Navy: With an
Introduction by Chester W. Nimitz , 538.

52. (U) John C. Walter, “William Harrison
Standley,” in Robert William Love, Jr. (ed), The
Chiefs of Naval Operations (Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1980), 93.

53. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 99.

54. (U) Vannevar Bush, Pieces of the Action (New
York: Morrow, 1970}, 71, and Library of Congress,
Papers of Stanford Caldwell Hooper, Box 16,
“Binaural Sons ofthe C,” June 1,1934. One of
Hooper’s most valuable connections with the scien-
tific elite was the “alumni” club for those who had
worked atthe two major sonar development sites
during World War I. He quite possibly met with Bush
inits informal context. Hecertainly had later con-
tacts with Bush when they were both associated with
the NACA. MIT was a major training resource of the
navy during WWI, and ithad the Pratt School of
Naval Architecture. Karl L. Wildes and Nilo A.
Lindgren, A Century of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at MIT , 1882-198 2 (Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1985), 393.

55. (U) NSA was tunable to provide copies of the
four Bush reports and the rest of files on Bush’s work
for the navy inthe 1930s. As will be discussed, the
later four general reports were for the design of the
machine that becarme known asthe Comparator.
Bush's initial report toHooper and Wenger was
probably much more general and was most likely
concerned with very broad issues of communications
technology. Bush’s oral history version of the negoti-

“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TO USA-AUS, CAN, GEICAND NZEIAT-
—TOR-SECRETICOMMHHREL-TFO-UGA-AUS-CAN- OBR AND NZDIAT

ations does not quite fit with other evidence, MIT
Archives MC143 111a to 116.

56. (U) Auseful long-term view of academic-mil-
itary relations is Henry Etzkowitz, “The Making of An
Entrepreneurial University: The Traffic Among MIT,
Industry, and the Military, 1860-1960,” E.
Mendelsohn, etal., (ed.), Science, Technology, and
the Military 12 (1988): 524.

57. (U) Ronald W. Clark, The Man Who Broke
Purple: The Life ofthe World’s Greatest
Cryptologist, Colonel William F. Friedman (London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1977).

58-¢@- David P. Mowry, “Listening tothe Rum
Runners,” Cryptologic Quarterly , 2 (1983), 27-50.

59. t6} Friedman seems to have found a way to
make sure that Yardley would be unable to join the
new army group. NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Memorandum on SIS, Formation of Cryptanalytic
Group” from CCH Series XI K, Box 13, circa 1929-
1939. David P. Mowry, “Listening tothe Rum
Runners.”

60. (U) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, draft
of proposed history “Machines in U.S. Cryptology
Before World War II,” 27 June 1975.

61. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, William F.
Friedman, “Addenda onthe IBM Sorter,” circa
August 1935.

62. <6 NSA CCH Series XII Z, William  F.
Friedman, “Invention of a Cryptanalytic Coincidence
Counter,” Signals Intelligence Section, 14 April 1937.
NSA CCH Series XII Z, William  F. Friedman,
“Description ofthe General Principles ofan
Invention for Locating Idiomorphs and Isomorphs in
Cryptanalysis,” 14 April 1937.

63. (U) Robert F. Kohler, Partners in Science:
Foundations and the Natural Sciences, 1900-1945
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991). Robert
F. Kohler, “The Ph.D. Machine: Building on the
Collegiate Base,” ISIS 81 (1990): 638-662.

64. (U) Robert F. Kohler, Foundations and the
Natural Scientists, 1900-1945. Roger L. Geiger, To
Advance Knowledge: The Growth of American
Research Universities, 1900-1940 (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1986).

65. (U) Larry Owens, “Straight Thinking,” 78-79.

66. (U) Rockefeller Archives, RG12.1, Diaries of
Warren Weaver: May 1,1940 “Atanasoff Visit”;
October 24, 1939, “Tour of Computing Centers”;
“Visit to Boston,” October 29, 1939; October 5, 1939,
“Howard Aiken Visit”; May 24, 1939, “Visits of
Harrison and Caldwell”; and January 1, 1939, “Visit
to MIT.”

67. (U) Daniel J. Kevles, The Physicists: The
History ofthe Scientific Community in Modern
America (New York: Knopf, 1978), 296.

68. (U) Animportant article onthe history of
both mechanical and electric-electronic fire control
devices is A. Ben Clymer’s, “The Mechanical Analog
Computers of Hannibal Ford and William Newell,”
Annals of the History of Computing 15 (1993): 19-34.

69. (U) Carrol! Pursell, “Science Agencies in
World War II: The OSRD and Its Challengers,” in
Nathan Reingold (ed.), The Sciences in the American
Context: New Perspectives , 359.

70. (U) On Deeds, Isaac F. Marcossen, Wherever
Men Trade (New York: Dodd-Meade, 1948), and
Colonel Deeds: Industrial Builder (New York: 1947).

71. (U) Copies of his patents were located in
Bush’s files at the Library of Congress.

72. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Vannevar
Bush. Bush had copies of various Hofgaard patents in
his papers.

73. (U) There isno evidence on whether or not
Bush and Deeds knew that IBM was beginning to
explore electronic calculation, but they must have
been aware, because of patent claims, of IBM’s grow-
ing interest in microfilm and allied devices, including
a “statistical” machine. Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 1825, Honeywell uv Sperry-Rand _ Trial
Records, Chronological File, March 1937, letters re:
visit of Green and Sullivan to MIT to view electronic
work.

74. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand Trial Records, May
19, 1938, Bush to Deeds “Center of Analysis.” A gen-
eral overview of the machine and project isin Brian
Randell (ed.), The Origins of Digital Computers:
Selected Papers, 3rd ed., 294, and Bernard Williams,
“Computing With Electricity, 1935-1945,” (Ph.D.
Thesis, University of Kansas, 1984), 137-170.

Page 31
FOR-SEGRETHGOMINTAREL-TFO-UGA-AUG,-GAN-OBR are NZEHRE

75. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
Records, Deposition of Joseph Desch; Electronics
Research that Bush asked if he wanted a job at NCR.
Honeywell v Sperry Rand Trial Records *Report of
Joseph Desch on Electronics Laboratory to H.N.
Williams.” August 16, 1938, Eugene Kniess, “First
Lab Rediscovered,” NCR Dayton 6 (19793): 1-3.

76. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand Trial Records,
Desch Deposition, “Report of Joseph Desch on
Electronics Laboratory to H. N. Williams,” August 16,
1938.

77. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell uv Sperry-Rand Trial Records,
Desch Deposition, and Reports of April 28, 1939 and
March 25, 1940. Smithsonian Interviews with Desch
and Mumma.

Page 32 “TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TU USA, AUS, CAN, GER AND NZUIXT
FOP-SEECRET/GOMIFTHREL—-FO-U6AAUE-GAN-GER-AND-NZLI

Chapter 2

(U) The First Electronic Camputer:

(U) A Reminder of Hooper’s Hopes and
Frustrations

(U) The development of new cipher machines
and the maturation of radio led toa critical data
problem for America’s cryptanalysts. There was
more and more data, and it was overwhelming
those who were charged with turning it into use-
ful information for policymakers. The failure to
predict the attack on Pearl Harbor, for example,
was the result of too much data. The thousands of
intercepted Japanese naval messages could not
be analyzed with the men and equipment avail-
able to Laurance Safford’s OP-20-G.*

(U) Vannevar Bush realized the similarity
between the challenges facing the cryptanalysts
and the ones faced by those who were trying to
reform the way the nation handled scientific
information. He believed the two groups could
share technology and methods. Captain Stanford
C. Hooper might not have been aware ofthe
trends in scientific literature, but he was certain-
ly frightened by increasingly sophisticated cipher
machines being introduced by potential enemies.
That was what led him and his protege, Joseph
Wenger, to Bush inlate 1935.” Despite Hooper’s
vision and Wenger’s efforts, OP-20-G began
World War II without any operating high-speed
devices. The Rapid Analytical Machine project
had to begin over again in 1942 and in conditions
ill-suited to long-term development.

(U) The reasons for the failure of Hooper’s
1930s plans for the application of
scientific/mathematical methods to codebreak-
ing are complex. Bureaucratic tangles, bad luck,
personality clashes, Bush’s stubbornness, inter-
national crises, and the intransigence of technol-
ogy partially account for the lost opportunity. But
the major factor was institutional. Above all else,

—TOP-SECRETHCONINTHREL TO HSA, AUS, CAN-OBRCANE NZL T—

Perhaps

the military had not yet placed great faith in the
kind ofinformation that cryptanalysis or other
signals intelligence could provide.*

() The Institutional Context

(U) By the mid-1930s, Hooper and his admir-
ing young officers feared that America would be
dragged into a war while Naval Communications
was unprepared for a face-off with any power.
Hooper’s 1930s strategy, to collaborate with uni-
versities and corporate centers, was an attempt to
compensate for the lack of money needed to pre-
pare for amodern war. The Chief of Naval
Operations supported his plans, but the CNO
approval did not mean smooth sailing for Hooper
and his men. To Hooper’s regret, OP-20-G con-
tinued to have todepend onthe Bureau of
Engineering because navy law and “G’s” pauper
budgets allowed little else. More independence
and money might have come to OP-20-G if there
had been widespread faith in signals intelligence.
But despite the contributions of Herbert Yardley’s
Black Chamber during the 1920s, then OP-20-G’s
penetration of Japanese naval codes, and then the
cracking of Japan’s diplomatic messages, code-
breaking remained astepchild ofthe American
military. * Ironically, the reading of the Japanese
naval and diplomatic code and cipher systems
during the 1920s and 1930s masked the need for
the long-term programs required for the develop-
ment of advanced methods and machines. Even
the navy’s operating cryptanalysts did not lobby
for such a program.® Only two men, Hooper and
Wenger, saw the need and were willing to suffer
the possible career penalties imposed on those
who became advocates for unpopular causes.

(U) Hooper and Wenger had never aban-
doned their 1930 hopes for machines that would

Page 33
“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-FO-UGA-AUE-GAN-GBR-and-NZL—

be much more advanced than the tabulators.® In
late January 1936, Wenger met with Bush and
discussed OP-20-G’s hopes and problems.” Bush
presented Wenger with a handwritten eight-page
outline ofhis plan for automating OP-20-G’s
cryptanalytic section.* Within aweek, Wenger
had secured the new Director of Naval
Communications’s approval of the proposed rela-
tionship with Bush.

(U) The First Defeat: Bush Is Rejected

(U) Just as Wenger proudly submitted his
own visionary outline for the reorganization of
OP-20-G, hereceived aslap inthe face. The
Bureau of Engineering refused to approve the
agreement with Vannevar Bush! ? There was rea-
son for the bureau’s alienation. What Bush
demanded and what Hooper and Wenger agreed
to were startling. Bush demanded having the gov-
ernment pay the bill while he remained free of
supervision. He wanted the relationship with the
navy to match the ideal relationship between uni-
versity researchers and major private founda-
tions. The researcher would submit a general pro-
posal and then be funded without any interfer-
ence from the grantor. Following on his beliefs,
Bush had refused to sign atypical navy contract
orto make any promises about the results of his
work.

(U) In addition, the original understanding
did not include apromise toconstruct any
machinery. Bush and Wenger had also agreed to
ignore the regulations demanding competitive
bidding on naval contracts. In addition, Bush
requested what was anenormous amount of
money inthe era, atleast for the navy. To hire
Bush meant taking precious resources from the
bureau and from OP-20-G.

(U) A Machine Too Soon
(U) There were also serious technical objec-

tions. Although only the barest sketch, Bush’s
early 1936 proposal showed that he wanted the

Page 34

navy touse optical scanning, high-speed data
tapes, electronic computing, and microfilm ina
series ofincreasingly complex cryptanalytic
machines. Such technologies, Bush emphasized,
would allow processing speeds from ten to one
hundred times faster than the tabulators.
Engineering thought that his recommendations
were speculative and liable to be very costly fail-
ures. Engineering’s staff had good reason to be
worried about the technical ideas. The core tech-
nologies Bush recommended were, to significant
degrees, still experimental.

(U) Also, the bureau’s engineers claimed they
had their own solution tothe problem of auto-
matic cipher machines. They were reluctant to
give Wenger even a hint oftheir approach, how-
ever.”° Whatever its secret alternative to Bush’s
proposals, engineering had accepted the tabula-
tor. It was an off-the-shelf technology that had a
stable manufacturer. IBM knew the ropes of gov-
ernment contracting and was investing in ongo-
ing development with its own funds. Many of
engineering’s men were already creating signifi-
cant and clever modifications to IBM’s machines,
making them more effective cryptanalytic tools.

(U) In addition, the views of OP-20-G's crypt-
analysts were not incomplete harmony with
Wenger’s. The operational cryptanalysts won-
dered who could steal the time to devise the new
procedures necessary to make such strange tech-
nology useful. Bythe mid-1930s, Laurance
Safford and Jack Holtwick became more allies
than enemies of Hooper’s long-term plans, but
the remainder of the staff were willing to join with
engineering in seriously questioning the value of
Bush’s machines.” All the objections and emo-
tions meant that by mid-1936 the attempt to
bring electronics to American cryptanalysis was
deadlocked, if not defeated. But Stanford Hooper,
Vannevar Bush, and Joseph Wenger collected the
needed political support, drew up a new plan, and
outflanked the bureau and the conservative crypt-
analysts.

“TOPSECRETICOMINTH REL TO USA AUS" CAN-OBR-ENE NEL
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TOUSAAUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZEA—

(U) Hooper and Wenger developed anew
strategy to surmount any remaining objections.
To placate the engineers, Hooper agreed to ask
Bush to submit a more detailed and specific pro-
posal. The new Bush proposal was submitted to a
special research group inthe navy rather than to
engineering. In September 1936, within a week
after he received the new plan, Hooper reported
to Bush that the prestigious research board had
approved his project. Wenger and Bush devel-
oped compromise positions onthe bureaucratic
and legal objections, then presented the new pro-
posal to engineering. The bureau gave in, but it
took almost all of October and November 1936 to
draft an acceptable contract.

(U) Under i937’s formal contract, Bush
agreed tofocus onthe details ofa particular
device so that engineering could have something
concrete. Hewas tosubmit four reports, each
detailing amajor component ofthe proposed
machine. The commitment to details and the year
and one-half time limit for delivery ofall the
reports helped to satisfy the bureau’s demand for
a scheduled product.”

(U) The Decision to Build a Machine

(U) Bush had become attached to Wenger and
Hooper, and their pleas convinced him to make a
gentleman’s promise that he soon regretted. He
told them he would try to build a machine, and if
he succeeded he would give itto the navy at no
additional cost, except for shipping charges for
the finished machine.*? Ithad become very
important to Wenger to have a device. To ensure
that his project would not die when Bush’s con-
tract ended, Wenger needed a machine to prove
that photoelectronics was practical.

(U) Bush was not sure that he could build a
machine intime, but inearly 1937 he was
absolutely sure of one thing: MIT’s work for OP-
20-G would be cut off by mid-1938 when the con-
tract with the bureau terminated. During the year
of bickering with the navy, Bush became involved

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USK, AUS-CAN-OBR-ANBNZLH A —

inan increasing number of projects that were
critical to the Institute’s planned analysis center
and his career. One consequence was that the
navy’s project became more ofa burden than an
opportunity.

(U) Bush spent much time onthe _ initial
designs for an astounding general-purpose elec-
tronic digital computer. He sent his students and
colleagues the first of several outlines of the pro-
posed digital device, soon to be called the Rapid
Arithmetical Machine, in January 1937.4 In the
three years after the first contacts with the navy,
Bush and his men had put all the years of struggle
behind them. Bush had his “boys” immersed in
three highly innovative digital projects: the elec-
tronic Rockefeller Analyser; the electronic, pro-
grammable Rapid Arithmetic Machine; and the
Rapid Selector.

(UV) Bush and Wenger Select a Problem

(U) Bush consulted with Joseph Wenger and
opted for a device to help OP-20-G apply the lat-
est statistical techniques to the cipher problems. *
Bush knew that if a machine was built, it had to be
one that was reliable enough toconvince the
bureau tofund along-term RAM project.
Furthermore, Bush knew that any machine he
created would have to outperform OP-20-G’s tab-
ulators and the special mechanical devices *© that
had become sodear tomany ofits staff. His
machine had to be much faster than the electro-
mechanical devices. *”

(U) There were many advanced cryptanalytic
methods for Bush toselect from. Perhaps
unknown to Bush or Wenger, the United States
Army’s cryptanalyst, William F. Friedman, was
toying with ideas about the use of optical scan-
ning. In April 1937, just as Bush was filling in the
design of his machine, Friedman filed a patent for
a system. The application did not mention crypt-
analysis, and its examples of possible use were
related to analog business applications, such as
the sorting of packages, but Friedman must have

Page 35
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR St NZLIXT—

realized that optical scanning had great potential
for cryptology.” Despite such projects, Bush was
facing the great challenge of creating what was
the world’s first high-speed cryptanalytic
machine. Balancing all the factors, including his
almost unshakable commitment tothe three
technologies of film, optics, and electronic count-
ing, Bush decided to automate one ofthe most
central new statistical methods, the Index of
Coincidence.

(U) The Index

(U) The method Bush and Wenger selected
for the machine, the Index of Coincidence, was
the most ubiquitous of the new theoretically jus-
tified statistical procedures. It was aformal and
universal method that could not be made worth-
less bya slight change in a cipher system. It was
based on the laws of probability. The Index was
rugged and independent because it needed only
intercepted cipher text and because it could
attack any type of cipher system.”? It also had a
wide range of powers.

(U) The Index allowed an analyst to identify
messages or portions of messages that were pro-
duced bythe same settings ofan encryption
device. That was a first step to determining the
wiring and settings of the encrypting components
of the machines. The Index of Coincidence could
then be put to work to identify a cipher key or the
order of the cipher wheels in a machine. Such new
methods were essential to an independent attack
onthe cipher devices. The stepping switch and
wired-wheel machines, such asthe Japanese
Purple and the German Enigma, were designed to
be unbeatable. They had cascades of transposing
rotors which repeatedly changed one letter to
another. Although each rotor was simple, togeth-
er they produced a long sequence of letter substi-
tutions without repetition or pattern.

(U) Such machines as Red, Purple, and the

Enigma came close tocreating arandom
sequence, but not quite. They appeared to be ran-

Page 36

dom because of the length of the cycle of unique
substitutions created by the three or four rotating
enciphering wheels or switches. But after 26 x 26
x26 ormore rotations, the wheels returned to
their initial positions, and the machine began to
repeat its letter substitutions. That made them
technically nonrandom and allowed many
nations to use Index methods against the simple
Enigmas ofthe Spanish Civil War.*° However,
every nation was improving its cipher machines.
Additional wheels with unique transpositions,
varied latches that turned a neighboring wheel
erratically, and plugboards to further disguise a
machine’s input-output relationships were added
tomany devices. The combinations of wheels,
wheel settings, and plugboard links meant that
trillions of possibilities had to be explored.

(U) In response, cryptanalysts countered with
various forms ofautomation. But most, like
Poland, bet onlimited methods and machines,
ones toexploit the quirks of particular cipher
machines or the procedural errors of the enemy.
There was good reason for such a turn away from
science. The German specialists in charge of the
Enigma, who were aware of the laws of probabil-
ity and also ofthe speed offilm and optical
machines, were confident that it would take any
formal attack too long to be of use to an enemy.
Given the special defenses built into the Enigma,
they calculated that it would take any machine so
long to perform a statistical analysis that by the
time a setting was identified, its messages would
be of no military value.™

(U) When Wenger met with Vannevar Bush in
1937 to decide exactly what type of machine to
design, his goal was the creation ofa device so
rapid that pure statistical analysis would be prac-
tical. After balancing the needs of OP-20-G and
the technological possibilities, he and Bush decid-
ed to automate the heart of the IC method, coin-
cidence counting.

(U) Acoincidence was the appearance of the
same letter in the same relative position in two or

-TOR-SECRETICOMIAHREL-TO-USA-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHRT——
—TOP_SECRETJCOMINTUREL TOUSA AUS CAN GBR AND NZUX4

more messages or in an offset of two copies of the
same message. The method could be extended to
the identification and counting of more than sin-
gle letter matches, but the essence of the Index
was the counting ofsingle coincidences. Ifthe
number of matches exceeded the number expect-
edfrom arandom distribution of letters, then
both messages were probably a product ofthe
same wheels, wheel settings, and portion ofthe
encryption machine’s cycle.

(U) Asthe enciphering machines became
more complex, the Index developed an almost
insatiable demand for data. The Index could be
computed with electromechanical machines,
such as a counting sorter or a tabulator with addi-
tional relay circuits. But even with the IBM
machines, the process was very slow and labor
intensive; along message could take days to ana-
lyze. One of the reasons the Index was selected as
the method for Bush to automate was that it was
so difficult to perform on electromechanical
equipment.

(U) An Added Bonus, Possibly

(S}/SE/-REE) Wenger and Bush were com-
mitted to mechanizing the IC method, and both
wanted to encourage the navy’s codebreakers to
apply mathematics, but Wenger realized that the
operating codebreakers had to use some less than
“scientific” approaches. If Bush could automate
them, the MIT machine and statistical methods
might receive a friendly evaluation by the crew at
OP-20-G. Bush agreed to sketch machines for
those rather crude methods, and he hinted that
he would try to have the proposed Comparator
(for the IC) be able to perform two of them. Both
methods, the Brute-force search and
Symmetrical-sequences, asked for asearch
through massive amounts of data to “locate,” not
count, coincidences. The coincidences sought
were not based on individual letters, but matches
between relatively long strings of cipher text or
long strings of text whose letters had been trans-
posed into their position relative to the starting

TORSECRETICOMINT REL TOUS A AUS -CAN—GBR-AND-NALHNA—

letter of the string. Both approaches were ways to
identify messages that were likely to have been
produced by the same key. They were used to find
messages that were in “depth.” No mathematics
was required; a machine just had tosense the
long coincidence and then inform its operator
where it was located.

(U) Bush Outlines the Machine and Sets
Difficult Goals

(U) After the navy contract was signed in
January 1937, Bush took time away from his
other duties to work onthe architecture of his
Index machine, the Comparator. He decided to
divide the project into four major parts corre-
sponding to functional units ofthe proposed
machine. Then, he chose what hardware was to
be used in each. Last came an equally challenging
step, finding the four men he needed to fill out his
sketches and, perhaps, build a machine.

(U) Bush had a frustrating time finding quali-
fied men. The need for secrecy made it almost
impossible to locate men and still maintain good
relations with the faculty. Only three people at
MIT, really two, knew what the work was for.
Bush and the project manager knew details, but
MIT's president learned only that secret work was
in progress. The men who were to build the com-
ponents and their regular faculty supervisors
were not told ofthe navy connection. Once
employed, they were instructed to be confidential
about their work but not told why. They would
never be informed asto what their components
were for.”

(U) Two graduate students received the initial
assignments. Jerry Jaeger, who had a back-
ground in machine tools and automatic controls,
was given the first task, to build the critical input
mechanism. Richard Taylor, who was already
important to the Rockefeller project’s electronics
and who would soon take charge of the Center of
Analysis, was chosen tobe responsible for the
electronic circuits. The third man, who was asked

Page 37
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-FO-U6A-AUE--GAN-GBR-aned-NZLIN4——

to develop the component to read the data tapes,
was ina somewhat different position atthe

Institute than Jaeger or Taylor. Herbert E. Grier
was agraduate of1933 who remained atthe

Institute asan unpaid research associate. Bush
was unable to find the needed fourth man among
the student body. Heturned toone ofthe

Institute’s machinists, Walter Kershner, to design
and construct what seemed to be the least chal-
lenging part ofthe Comparator, its data input
device. Kershner probably had been working ona
similar automatic tape punch for the Rockefeller
Analyser.

(U) Finding a manager for the project was a
greater challenge. It was not until early summer
1937 that Bush thought he had alead ona quali-
fied engineer: Waldron Shapleigh MacDonald.

(U) MacDonald was one of the most unusual
and fascinating of MIT’s students, and he
remains an unrecognized figure in the birth of the
modern computer. MacDonald first appeared at
MIT in the early 1930s when he enrolled as a spe-
cial undergraduate student. His initial year in
Cambridge was spent trying to prove to the elec-
trical engineering faculty that his lack of formal
preparation was not abarrier to academic suc-
cess. Although he performed well in his classes,
he was unable to surmount bureaucratic hurdles,
illness, and the depletion of his savings. He had to
leave MIT without a degree. But he quickly found
very well-paying work as an engineer and began a
lifelong career as an innovator in computers and
automatic controls.

(U) Bush offered MacDonald a professional
salary and help in obtaining a master’s degree in
electrical communications atthe Institute. In
return, MacDonald was asked for a firm commit-
ment tocome to MIT to see the navy’s project
through to completion. But MacDonald needed
time to fulfill his existing responsibilities, and he
did not arrive at MIT until September 1937, leav-
ing only some ten months to become oriented, to
check and revise the Comparator’s parts, prepare

Page 38

reports, and assemble and test the historic
machine.

(U) MacDonald’s ingenuity and his hands-on
engineering ability were needed onthe navy’s
1930s project, but his role was not a truly creative
one. Well before hearrived inlate 1937, the
design ofthe machine and the schedule for the
project had been determined. His job was to
make what Bush had specified come to life and to
doit before the end ofthe navy contract.
Unfortunately for MacDonald, he inherited a
fixed design, components which were hastily
made by others, Bush’s order to “get the job done
ontime,” and full responsibility. By September
1937 Bush was already too busy with his other
work to attend to the now rather inconsequential
navy project. Among other things, Bush was
readying himself to assume the leadership of the
powerful Carnegie Institution.

(U) The Comparator Really Doesn't Go to
Washington

+07/F6C0} Bush and Wenger were very wise
in setting the limited goal ofa machine for the

Index of Coincidence. Electronic computation
was having its birth pangs, and no one had a way
to create amachine whose hardware could be
made to imitate any process. A major reason why
all the 1930s computers were limited in function
was the absence of a viable memory technology.**
Auniversal data computer, one that worked on
large volumes of input and that had high-speed
memory, did not appear until the 1950s. Then,
machines such asthe UNIVAC depended upon
very demanding, slow, and expensive, magnetic
tape memory systems.75

(877FOCO? Bush’s first sketches of his
Comparator reflected the limitations of the mem-
ory and electronic technologies. Each ofthe
Comparator’s four major components had its own
very significant practical challenges. The state of
the technology did not allow elegant solutions to
the problems of high-speed input, sensing, count-

_TOP SECRETNCOMINT/REL TO.USA AUS CAN GBR-AND-NZLH( 4am
-TOP_SECRETHCOMINTHREL—TFO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GEICAND NZDIXT

ing, and recording. Because of the conduct of the
1930's Comparator project and the nature of OP-
20-C’s early wartime efforts, it was not until late
1943 that America had more than the patched-up
Bush Comparator to represent its nearly fifteen
years of attempts to build sophisticated electron-
ic codebreaking devices.

(U) Too Much to Ask of Mere Machines

CESA/GHAREB) The Index was a demanding
cryptanalytic method. To tally all the possible sin-
gle letter coincidences intwo messages calls for
(n*(n-1)) comparisons.”° If two four-letter mes-
sages are examined for coincidences, twelve com-
parisons must be made; 500 messages demanded
almost 250,000 tests; a2,000-letter message
called for almost 4,000,000. Complete analyses
oflong messages could take days or weeks by
hand and tabulator methods. Compounding the
challenge ofraw speed was Wenger's demand
that the Comparator be able to handie the longest
messages. There was good reason for that
because the more characters ina message the
more likely that something of value would emerge
from ananalysis. Fortunately, cryptologists
around the world knew that messages with too
many words posed a danger to their systems and
instructed that messages belimited toas few
words possible. The very upper limit was 2,000
characters. Messages of 200 characters were typ-
ical, but the need to analyze longer ones in a time-
ly way made speed and a large memory important
goals.*”

(U)} Combined with Bush’s desire for a mini-
mal number of electronic components, the call for
speed created unexpected challenges for the stu-
dents at MIT. One of them was printing. To main-
tain speed, printing had to be done while the tape
was running. The solution Bush and his men
devised was sensible but crude, and itled toa
need for aneven faster mechanical tape drive.
Printing was to take place while a blank portion of
tape was running. In practice, this meant that
approximately one half of each tape was blank,

TOR SECRIFHCOMINTIREL-TO-UGR-AUG-GaRN-QBRUANE-NZLIOH

thus halving the number of possible comparisons
during arun ofthe tape. Because of that, Bush’s
men had to double the originally planned speed
of the drive to achieve the processing goals.**

(U) Even without the tape handicap, Bush
had to outdo much existing technology to achieve
his minimum Comparator speed.”? Bush wanted
the machine to deliver data to the reading station
at over thirty times the rate of standard telegraph
equipment and sixty times faster than a movie
projector ifit was toreach the goal of 20,000
comparisons a minute. Even in the late 1940s, the
most sophisticated high-speed transmission
“baud rates” were in the range of 1,800 characters
aminute —or more than ten times slower than
Bush needed in order to make the navy machine
an attractive alternative. There were special high-
speed drives for sending bulk messages, and dur-
ing World War II “flash” systems were developed.
Those devices, however, were not proven inthe
mid-1930s. The talking picture industry did not
provide much help. In the 1930s, moving picture
film was moved at less than 300 feet per hour.*°
The Comparator had to sense and route data at
rates forty times greater than an IBM sorter and
160 times faster than a tabulator.

(U) Wenger thought that he might overcome
the bureau’s protests if Bush could add parallel
features to his essentially serial machine. Wenger
asked him to try to include what would be needed
tomake isomorphic and three- and four-letter
(polymorphic) coincidence tests that had been
discussed earlier.

CPS}/SH+/REE) Wenger also gave his
approval for the “locating” feature. [t would allow
what the World War II cryptanalysts called “brute
force” searching. Masses of data could be scanned
at every position of two messages with the hope of
finding indications that two messages had been
enciphered with the same key.

Page 39
FOP-SEGRETICOMINTHREL-T0-USA-AUE-GAN-GBR-and-NZE

(U) No Thanks for the Memories

(U) Because the Comparator was a data-
dependent machine, the greatest problem facing
Bush’s students was how tostore and retrieve
information. The Comparator needed a large-
scale and very high-speed memory, but such
memories did not exist in the 1930s." What was
onthe technological horizon was not encourag-
ing. Storage in massive banks of capacitors or
resistors, which some computer designers were
thinking of using, was too expensive, and such
banks took too long toload and. unload.** The
rumors about the use of special versions of televi-
sion tubes as memory were just that in the mid-
1930s. And no one thought that delay lines would
ever be able to hold more than a few bits of infor-
mation. In 1937 work was just beginning on mag-
netic memories, and storage of large amounts of
data in two or multistate electronic tubes or relays
was out of the question. *?

(U) Unfortunately for Bush and Wenger,
there had been few advances in tape technology
since the introduction of modern automatic tele-
graph readers inthe early twentieth century.
Standard teletype technology had not evolved
into acompetitor tothe punch card.** In early
1937 the only option seemed to be microfilm.

(U) Bush thought his men would overcome
the difficulties caused by film shrinkage and dis-
tortion when the film was sped past a reading sta-
tion.® Unfortunately, microfilm proved too diffi-
cult for a machine that could meet the mid-1938
deadline for the delivery of the Comparator. As a
result, in mid-1937 Bush sent his students ona
hurried search for another medium and a way to
move it at incredible speeds. The MIT men chose
aunique 7omm-wide paper tape that Eastman-
Kodak used for packaging its movie film. It was
strong, wide enough to accommodate Bush’s cod-
ing scheme, and, very important, it blocked light
because ofits acetate coating and its alternate
red-black layers.°° Also, early tests indicated the
tape would maintain its structural integrity after

Page 40

being punched. All those features justified the
high cost of the Eastman product although it was
soon learned that its data capacity would not be
much more than that of telegraph tape.*’

(U) The disappointingly low density meant
that much effort had to be put into the develop-
ment ofa high-speed tape drive, one burdened
with some very special demands. In addition to
the need for ultra-high speeds, the tape transport
had to pass two tapes in perfect alignment over
the reading station, then step one tape one char-
acter relative tothe other until all possible com-
parisons had been run.**

(U) The Limits of Mechanics

(U) The first man onthe summer crew was
given the responsibility of creating the mechani-
cal combination needed tocompensate for the
low data-carrying power ofthe Eastman tape.
Already familiar with the drives inthe machines
used inthe cloth and newspaper industries, the
young engineer decided to center his component
ona four-foot long frame tohold the tapes.
Pulleys were to maintain the required tension on
the loops of tape. Driven by a fast electric motor
and asystem ofshafts and gears, the tape was
guided by both rollers and sprockets.* The entire
transport was mounted on tall legs and stood
some four feet off the ground to ease the chore of
changing tapes.*°

(U) The tape transport was well designed and
was delivered on schedule, but it did not reach the
speeds Bush desired. At its best moments it ran at
less than two and a half miles an hour, not the five
ormore needed for atruly rapid machine. The
tape was the machine’s timer and set many of the
requirements for the other major components.
Once its features were known, work on the read-
ing station and electronic counters could be com-
pleted. Armed with Bush’s previous instructions
and the specifications for the tape drive, the next
man tackled the problems of photoelectric
sensing.

~TORSECRETICOMATHREL-TO-U6A-- AUG; GAN-- OBR ANE NZEIAT
TOP SECRETHECOMINTHREL—-FO-UE6AR-AUS,-CAN-GBR-ANDNZLUXI

(U) Let There Be Light, But Not Too Much

(U) One of Bush’s first technical commit-
ments was to the sensing of the presence of light
rather than its absence. Following on that, he
ordered his men to code each letter of a message
by punching ahole ina column ofthe seventy-
millimeter wide tape. There was to be only one
hole toa column oftwenty-six fields. An addi-
tional field in each column served as a timer. Ifa
column held data, this extra field was punched.
When two active columns overlapped, light was
directed to a timing cell which then readied the
sensing photocells toexamine many data
columns simultaneously.

(64}54-+REL) There were tobe atleast ten
data columns, thus letters, packed into a linear
inch of tape. To accommodate Wenger’s need for
counting more than single coincidences, ten let-
ters were to be read at one time. This called for
ten photocells for message characters, one to each
column.

(U) The engineer had tocreate amask to
ensure that light that shone through the first tape
did not drift before it fell onthe lower one. He
also had to find alens that would direct the light
beams from overlapping holes, one for each col-
umn, onto the correct sensing photocell. An allied
problem was more challenging: he had to keep
light from a coincident column from spilling over
into the area of another column’s photocell. The
state of photocell technology did not allow easy
solutions to any of the reader’s problems. Among
other problems, they remained fairly large. As a
result, the young MIT engineer could not put ten
ofthem directly under the columns ofthe
Comparator’s tapes. They had tobe placed far
under the reader and were arranged in a “U” pat-
tern. That meant that the straight, parallel light
from the coincident columns had to be accurately
deflected. Moreover, complete electronic pack-
ages for the photocells were not supplied by man-
ufacturers. The MIT engineer had to tune each
photocell and build the amplification circuits to

TFOP-SECRETHCOMINTHRED-TO USA, AUS, CAN GBR ANE NZL —

turn the signals from the photocells into the dis-
crete pulses needed bythe third major compo-
nent of the Comparator, the electronic counters.

(U) The Most Difficult Problem of All, But It
Wasn't

(U) With the knowledge of the tape and pho-
tocell systems, the third young man began his
work onthe final details of what everyone
thought would bethe most difficult part ofthe
project, its electronic counting system.

(U) Precise digital counting with electronics
was in its early years, and all attempts at creating
tube-based calculating circuits were risky.
Electronic tubes were designed for analog work,
and it was only empirical tweaking that allowed
them to be on-off switches. As late as 1940, the
best experimental electronic counters worked at
20,000 decimal counts asecond during their
cooperative periods.

(U) One of his greatest challenges was the cir-
cuitry for the Comparator’s parallel-processing
feature. It was needed to allow the machine to
perform the simultaneous multiple letter tests
that were sovaluable tothe cryptanalysts.
Without parallel processing, the machine’s power
would be reduced by a factor of four. The student
engineer had to construct five independent elec-
tronic counters which were to tap the data from
the reading station at the same time. The young
man took the safe technological route, choosing
to stay with the predictable and familiar gas-filled
Thyratrons.

(U) The choice of architecture for the counters
was also driven by the need to send the navy at
least a feasible design, if not a machine, by mid-
1938. Like the other electronic computer builders
ofthe era, the young MIT engineer decided to
imitate mechanical calculating machines.* His
counters were decimal, not binary. Although such
a design limited the range of the application of a
computer, it was known to work and was simpler

Page 41
—TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-T6-UG A AUG-CAN-GBR-and-NZLIX1

to construct than binary circuits. Each of the dec-
imal counters was to consist ofthree or more
rings of ten tubes with the needed electronics for
arithmetic carrying, power, and control.

(U) Providing the option of performing sever-
al different analyses at one time meant additional
challenges. Bush had designed the machine to
allow the analysts to select the particular tests for
each run. Topermit this, the young engineer
incorporated a set of “and” circuits that could be
set totest for the desired combination. The
Comparator’s Rossi “and” circuit was the key to
the machine’s flexibility and parallelism.

(U) In addition to the counters and the “and”
circuits, the third engineer was handed another
tough job. He was given the responsibility for cre-
ating the banks ofelectrical relays needed to
stand between the high-speed tube counters and
the much, much slower printer. At the end of each
pass, the counters had to be polled for their con-
tents and numbers sent to the relays. The relays
worked as a short-term memory, sending pulses
to the magnets that controlled the print bars.**

(U) The Easiest Becomes the Most Difficult

(U) There was a fourth man. He was in charge
ofthe crucial data-entry system. The punch for
the data tapes proved to be the Achilles heel of the
Comparator. The problem was a perhaps
inescapable result of the use of paper tape, as was
Bush’s inefficient 1 of 26 coding scheme.

(U) The technology ofthe 1930s led him to
reject amethod ofcoding that could have
increased densities on the tapes by at least a fac-
tor offive and that would have led the
Comparator’s codes to fit with the navy’s modern
communication system. The use ofa _five-field
character code, the Baudot code, would have
allowed at least five letters to be placed ona line
(column) of the 7omm tape. But the size and sen-
sitivity of holes and photocells, the problems of
aligning tapes, and the desire to limit the elec-

Page 42

tronics of the machine precluded the use of that
coding pattern.*? Bush’s special coding scheme
demanded acustom-made and very complex
mechanism.

(U) An MIT machinist was instructed to make
a keyboard-operated device to simultaneously
punch two exact copies ofa message. It had to
keep the two tapes in perfect synchronization and
to make precisely spaced tiny holes in each col-
umn and row. The punch had to advance the
tapes with absolute precision. Most challenging,
ithad to maintain the integrity ofits tiny and
sharp needle-like punching arms despite the
impact as the arms struck the Eastman tape. The
machinist was asked to devise tape cutters and
the means to ensure that the spliced ends of the
tapes would not pull apart during the runs.
Unfortunately, the punch was the last component
ofthe Comparator to be turned over to the proj-
ect manager and then it was “not satisfactory.” *
The punch’s inadequacies cannot be blamed on
the machinist; the responsibility has to be placed
onthe original design for the Comparator.
Between 1938 and 1945 several teams of engi-
neers tried to produce a viable data entry system
for the paper tapes; none was able to build a
rugged and reliable punch.

(U) Beyond Murphy’s Law

(U) When Waldron MacDonald arrived in
September, three student engineers had already
sent their work tolocal machine shops. Bush
trusted their judgment so much that, without
examining the parts, he put MacDonald to writ-
ing the descriptive reports for the navy.
MacDonald took Bush’s first schemes for each
component, added what the students had done,
and sent the reports to the navy for payment.
The reports, including the final one submitted in
the spring of 1938, were upbeat and gave the
specifications for what everyone thought would
be the first operating electronic data processing
machine. **

FOP-GEGRETIGOMINFHREL FES A AUS; CAN OBICANE NZ EINt —
~FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREE-FO-USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZDINt—

(U) Although the reports contained a bright
picture, the Comparator project had fallen victim
to a host of problems. But the main reason for the
problems in 1937 and 1938 was the technologies
Bush soadmired. They were not ready tobe
turned into useful machinery. Unfortunately, the
results Bush and his young men expected on the
basis of their early bench tests did not carry
through to the parts they gave to MacDonald. The
Comparator was far from ready for assembly.
And only MacDonald was left to rescue it!
MacDonald had much, much more todo than
simply link the components together. Almost
every component had to be reworked.

(U) MacDonald put much thought and energy
into reshaping the electronic components, and he
more than fine-tuned the tape transport. More
basic work had to be done on the reader. The opti-
cal system needed acomplete overhaul, and it
took much of MacDonald’s attention. To bring
the correct amount of light to each of the ten cells,
he devised a 1930’s version of fiber-optics.

(U) Thus, MacDonald’s assignment turned
into something much more demanding than
either heor Bush had imagined in mid-1937.
MacDonald was not sure that he could solve all
the problems of the transport, counters, and opti-
cal sensors. Then chance compounded an already
difficult situation. Ina friendly game of touch
football, MacDonald was knocked out by an
unlucky “poke on the jaw.” MacDonald remained
unconscious and confined tobed for several
weeks. His energy was seriously drained for
months afterwards.*” Despite the injury, Bush
chose not to replace MacDonald.

(U) What Hooper had complained about for
so many years, the lack of appreciation of science
inthe navy, again struck the Comparator.
Wenger, the strongest voice for a revolution in the
technologies of signals intelligence and crypt-
analysis, readied himself to leave for sea duty in
mid-1938. Wenger had to spend the five months
before he was rotated putting the finishing touch-

—TOR SECRET/COMATHREL+0-USi-AUG-GAN-GBROANE-NZEH I

es on the detailed reports for Hooper's grand pro-
posal for amodern communications system.
Wenger left the country just amonth before
MacDonald shipped the troubled Comparator to
Washington.

(U) Inspring 1938, MacDonald began test
runs on the rebuilt parts.*® He also had the chore
of instructing the engineer the navy sent to learn
about the machine. Wenger had arranged for a
bureau technician to spend some time at MIT.
During the spring, Frederick Dulong, one of the
many ex-navy men who stayed on in Washington
as civilian employees, was sent to MIT.

(U) Wenger considered Bush very generous
for having constructed a machine and approved
Bush’s suggestion that MacDonald be hired by
the navy to fine tune the Comparator once it was
in Washington. The bureau agreed and requested
MacDonald totravel to Washington with the
Comparator and to stay for three months. He was
to adjust the machine and to instruct both techni-
cians and cryptanalysts in its use. Safford, now in
charge ofthe Comparator, was pleased that the
bureau promised to give him some additional, if
not permanent, help.

(U) As soon as Bush signaled that a machine
would besent to Washington, Wenger began
expensive preparations. He requested the money
for tapes and lights and extra tubes, and he read-
ied an area for the Comparator within OP-20-G’s
secret rooms. Ina few weeks, additional funds
were requested for the hardware necessary to
prepare the tapes for the Comparator.*® Wenger
went much further. Describing a new era in crypt-
analysis, he convinced the navy brass to give seri-
ous consideration to funding more devices.®° By
the end of 1938, OP-20-G’s budget request
included more than $20,000 for additional Bush
devices and special additions tothe first
machine.™ In addition, “G’s” new war plans con-
tained arequest for aComparator for the pro-

Page 43
“TOP-SECRETICOMINTINEL TO USK, AUS CAN GBR ant RZLIXT

posed major cryptanalytic station at Pearl
Harbor.**

(UL) Spring Isa Time for Love, Not
Machinery

(U) When the Comparator arrived in
Washington in late June, a month late, it would
not start.5? As bad, two ofits most important
parts had not been shipped -—the punch and
printer. About a month behind schedule and still
only “semifinished,” itfound anew and well-
intentioned guardian. But Fred Dulong could not
give full attention tothe machine. By mid-July,
Dulong was able torun the counting circuits,**
but any more work was stalled because of the
missing punch and printer. Unknown to anyone,
they had been placed in a Cambridge safe-deposit
box by MacDonald to await his return to the
country in August® following a honeymoon.

(U) The cryptanalysts certainly did not have
the time to wet-nurse the Comparator. While the
bureau’s men bewailed the results of becoming
entangled with animpractical professor, the
cryptanalysts in charge ofthe day-to-day work
were coming under incredible pressures to pene-
trate all of the sophisticated Japanese code and
cipher systems. Japan’s invasion of China in 1937
had made it clear that war was imminent,® and
by 1938 OP-20-G was facing crisis conditions.
The sinking ofthe Panay in December led toa
scramble to protect American codes. In addition,
there were hints that Japan was about to make
another sweeping change inits codes and to
introduce its Purple cipher machine.*” What
energies OP-20-G had were necessarily devoted
to developing techniques and machines that gave
immediate results. Its faith was, quite naturally,
placed in the direct analogs of Japan’s encipher-
ing machines, and its men wanted resources
devoted to modernizing the tabulators.

(U) Thus Waldron MacDonald did not arrive

in Washington atthe right time for any experi-
mentation at“G” orthe bureau. Driving from

Page 44

Cambridge inAugust 1938, hehad the
Comparator’s punch and printer in the back of his
station wagon. Working in OP-20-G’s downtown
offices, MacDonald attempted tosave his and
Bush’s reputation.

(U) He hurried the Navy Yard's effort to build
tape duplicators and splicers and soon convinced
the bureau to build anew punch. The one from
MIT could not be coaxed into working. Don Seiler
took on that challenge.®* Then MacDonald began
working onthe other components. Although no
major changes were made to the Comparator, it
took anunexpected fourth month ofwork to
announce a finished machine in November.

(U) Inlate 1938, OP-20-G’s leader, Safford,
congratulated Bush and informed him the crypt-
analysts and the bureau’s men planned to spend
the next year experimenting with the wonderful
and reliable machine. Possibly because they now
realized how much a well-schooled optical elec-
tronics engineer would cost, OP-20-G did not
make an effort to hire a replacement for the MIT
engineer or, as planned earlier in the year, to con-
struct at least one more Comparator.*°

(U) RAM Praject Seems to Die, Late 1938

(U) With Wenger gone, no one pressed for an
immediate extension ofthe program.” Bush,
in turn, quickly fended off another attempt by the
navy tolink him to“G’s” projects. The conse-
quences ofthe failure tocontinue on with
the Comparator project in1938 were severe.
Soon after MacDonald left Washington, the
Comparator again became inoperable. It was so
temperamental that the only attention it received
was from Dulong, whose many other duties
allowed just part-time work.™ It was listed on
OP-20-G’s equipment roster in 1939, but it was
never used, not even onthe type of
important project for which it had been designed,
the breaking ofthe Japanese Purple cipher
machine.™ Its technical problems become so
great that it was removed from the cryptanalysts’

—~TOR-SECRETJCOMINT REL FOU A-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZ —
—FOP-SECRETH/GOMINTHREL-FOU6A-AU6-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEH

quarters and sent to the Navy Yard where it could
be tinkered with.

(U) Although overworked because ofthe
Japanese code and cipher crises, Safford had
asked for areport onthe Comparator and
received some very disheartening news. Dulong
responded that nothing but the electronic coun-
ters proved reliable, and the machine had not
been functional long enough to allow in-depth
development of procedures. The Navy Yard’s men
did not think there was any possible quick fix for
the device. Most ominous was the failure of the
data entry component, the punch. Even the sec-
ond version ofthat purely mechanical and sup-
posedly simple mechanism could not be made to
produce precise tapes. There was little hope of
basing anentire system of analytical machines
around the original Bush design if there was not
an efficient and reliable data entry device.® In
1940, Safford, who two years before declared the
Comparator areliable and useful invention, had
to admit the machine never worked and that the
entire project had not progressed as planned.

(U) A Comparator There May Never Be

(U) In late 1940 Bush gained another chance
to prove the power of optical-electronic machines
and the ability of academics to create the tech-
nologies of defense. °* He arranged for MIT’s
John Howard and his men torescue the first
paper tape Comparator and to design the long-
promised microfilm version.

(U) This second MIT OP-20-G project of late
1940 is of extreme historical importance because
it became the foundation for the United States
Navy’s incredible Rapid Machines Program of
World War II. That little known adventure rivaled
Britain’s famous work onthe Bombes and the
Colossus.

(U) Tragically, that program is also important
because ofits failures. Although it began with
expectations of producing electronic digital

~TOP SECRETICOMINTIJREL TOUSA AUS -CAN-GRR-AMDNZHX4

machines to attack the feared cipher devices of
the Axis powers, it turned to older technology and
logic. To be able to provide anything of value to
OP-20-G, Howard’s men had to step back from
electronics, digital techniques, and microfilm.
Although the navy’s cryptanalysts began World
War II with promises that electronics could be
made to work, they had to wait for almost two
years after Pearl Harbor before any machines
appeared that affirmed that Bush’s ideas had
potential.

(U) The story of John Howard’s navy project
has to begin with the crises in Europe and Asia,
policy decisions in the White House and London,
and the organization of American science in
World War II.

(U) Big Science Begins to Emerge

(U) Bush’s high-science friends were active in
more than the cause of research. They were
among the nation’s earliest supporters of a posi-
tive response to the German threat. They lobbied
for the creation of the National Defense Research
Committee (NDRC). The NDRC was the realiza-
tion of Bush’s ideal of how to link academia and
the military. Given almost complete power by
Roosevelt to shape the NDRC, Bush laid down
ground rules that gave power toacademics to
begin research projects and to be free of military
control. Having its own funds and being a presi-
dential creature, the NDRC and its more powerful
extension, the Office of Scientific Research and
Development, could initiate blue-sky programs
and carry them through to development.

(U) One ofthose programs interlaced the
NDRC with American cryptanalysis, but only
after ithad dealt with along list of projects of
much higher priority. Atomic power and radar
were the leading problems, and the scientists at
the most prestigious universities and corporate
research centers received the first calls from the
NDRC’s leaders.

Page 45
FOP-SEGREHICOMNTHREL-TO-USA--AUS,-CAN,GBRand NZLUX1

(U) The executives at the NDRC realized that
atomic research and the development ofthe
potentials of radar called for advanced computa-
tion, but, alone, those problems would have led to
aminimal NDRC involvement in computers. It
was alower priority challenge that plunged the
NDRC into computer research and established
who would participate in the navy’s future Rapid
Machine effort. Atomic scientists were calling for
electronic control devices, but most important for
the history of OP-20-G was the hope that radar
could be used to automatically control antiair-
craft weapons. That led tothe NDRC’s involve-
ment in the development of electronic fire control
computers in the early 1940s.°5

(U) The exploration of such electronic digital
machines was the perfect type of work for the
NDRC because it centered onunproven and
experimental technologies. The NDRC’s scien-
tists believed that digital electronics had poten-
tial, and they rekindled the fire control projects.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars were poured
into fire-control computer and atomic-counter
work in the first two years of NDRC’s life.

(U) Fire Control

(U) The NDRC began the first stages of its fire
control project inJune 1940. Bush’s old friend
Warren Weaver ofthe Rockefeller Foundation
assumed command. The research at RCA, which
had led to the design of the fastest binary circuits
inthe nation, ifnot the world, was picked up by
the NDRC. Then Weaver coordinated the work at
RCA with wide-ranging explorations at Eastman,
MIT, Bell, and, to some extent, NCR. Of signifi-
cance for the history of OP-20-G’s machines, IBM
was again left out ofthe NDRC circle although its
centers of electronic research were working on
quite advanced components and systems. °

(U) Because ofthe NDRC’s stimulus, by the
time of America’s formal entry into the war, RCA,
Eastman, Bell, and MIT had several proposals for
digital-based fire control systems, ones the NDRC

Page 46

evaluators thought had great promise. In the

spring of 1942, meetings were called, and all par-
ticipants shared their knowledge and designs.°”
The reports of the fire control projects were made
available tothe American technical community,
which now included John Howard. He was made
aware of the designs for the most advanced com-
puter components.

(U) Many ofthe fire control developments
would find their way into cryptanalytic machines
and into such pathbreaking computers as the
ENIAC. By mid-1942, there were great hopes for
the development of at least a prototype electronic
gun controller. But Warren Weaver and his assis-
tants concluded that digital electronics was too
good. It was too fast and too precise for the guns
used by the military. In July 1942 the fire control
program was dropped — but with three important
exceptions. The development projects for the
Eastman film-based analog-to-digital signal con-
vertor and RCA’s fabulous multifunction
Computron tube were to be continued, as was
NCR’s counting circuit research. Although they
were viewed aslong-term projects, the three
efforts were financed for only a few more months
because the press of other work forced the NDRC
to abandon them.

(U) The Second Comparator

(U) Meanwhile, just weeks after the work on
high-speed electronic counters and fire control
computers had begun, Bush and OP-20-G came
together. A visit with Bush in early summer 1940
indicated a reawakening of interest in the original
Comparator, which had sat unused atthe Navy
Yard for almost two years. But it was not until
October 1940 that anything was done about its
future.

(U) Alimited and secondary role for MIT was
unacceptable to Bush, however. He returned to
his old demand for freedom from bureaucratic
control, and, within a few weeks, he was able to
reshape the first murmuring about anew

—TOR-SECRETHCOMNTHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-OBICAND NZLIRT
“TOP-SPCRETICOMINTIREL-TO USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZDIKI—

Comparator into a project that satisfied his ambi-
tions. Bush wanted a prototype ofa microfilm
Comparator. While the first Comparator would
continue to be a paper-tape, the second genera-
tion Comparator was to be centered about micro-
film. Bush soothed Laurance Safford’s anxieties
about optical and electronic machines and told
him that the new microfilm version ofthe

Comparator would be delivered in time to be of
use inthe coming war. Inlate 1940, Safford
encountered little resistance to the idea of trans-
ferring the project to MIT. The navy’s cryptana-
lysts were too busy battling the Japanese naval
code, and too worried about taking onthe

German systems to care about the loss of control
over unusable machinery.

(U) OP-20-G and Ultra

(U) As early as mid-1940, the most important
Americans were informed of some of Britain’s
promising though still limited powers over a few
German cryptologic systems. But OP-20-G was
not told how to break the Enigma or other impor-
tant ciphers. Despite the British promise to share
the information from Ultra, the Americans feared
a British monopoly over Enigma. In addition, in
early summer 1940 there were fears that Britain
would collapse. OP-20-G’s cryptanalysts worried
they would have toassume_ responsibility for
Enigma, something for which they were totally
unprepared. ”

(U) The U-boat threat had already led to
British pleas that OP-20-G and Naval Intelligence
shift their scarce resources to direction-finding
and traffic analysis to compensate for their inabil-
ity to read any significant German naval system.”
The cryptanalysts in Washington thus had little
time to waste on what some of them regarded as
Bush’s technological fantasies. The navy’s engi-
neers, already overworked creating analogs of
encryption machines, building advanced radio
equipment, and helping to revise OP-20-G’s tab-
ulators, were happy to be rid of the “college pro-
fessor’s” folly.

FOP-GEGRETICGMIFTHREE TOUS A AUS AN -GBICANE-NZE—

(U) The navy’s bureaucrats were less happy
about yielding control. They agreed to most of
Bush’s conditions although they did want a con-
tract and agreed to have the MIT work coordinat-
edthrough the navy’s Office of Research and
Inventions. The BuShips’ (Bureau of Ships)
demands in late 1940 were much less severe than
in 1935, but ittook some additional political
maneuvering to put the Rapid Machine project
back into the hands ofthe MIT students.

(U) Under the 1940 agreement with the
Bureau of Ships, Bush had full control of the new
Comparator project, and his men were to work at
MIT, not atthe Navy Yard. The navy also agreed
to wait for the results of the new MIT work before
considering the construction of any more Rapid
machines with or without MIT involvement.

tS77ST/FREE OP-20-G may not have told

Bush, but it was not relying solely upon his ideas
for machine processing; ithad to protect itself
through the use of older and proven technologies.
The experienced cryptanalysts had insisted ona
tabulator program, one that was to remain under
their direct control. MIT’s men were to have no
say about the new tab projects. In early 1941 IBM
was contacted about making the major changes in
its machines required to allow its equipment to
perform new tests. For example, relays were
added tothe machines to strip superencipher-
ments from the Japanese code and to flag repeti-
tions of code groups. By mid-year IBM was asked
todo much more and to give OP-20-G very spe-
cial attention.”

(U) Bush was finally able to circumvent the
bureaucracy and go his own way, perhaps with
ambitions to create a full Rapid Machine center at
the Institute, one free of military interference.”
The old Comparator was to be shipped to MIT for
repair, and a new one was to be designed and con-
structed in Cambridge.

(U) Howard quickly became the man in
charge of the Comparator project. Although the

Page 47
 

future of Bush’s ideas rested upon the new micro-
film Comparator, the old paper tape machine and
its punch became the focus of attention. The
punch was a critical problem because its two pre-
vious versions were failures. Understandably,

Howard urged his men to use caution as well as
creativity, but the slow tempo of his project soon
generated concern within the Bureau of Ships.

During the first months of 1941, as time passed
without results, the navy found it more and more
difficult to accommodate having its project run by
a civilian agency.

(UV) So Long for So Litile

(U) Ittook almost a full year to redo the old
Comparator, the only Rapid Machine. It arrived
in Washington three weeks after the Japanese
struck at Pearl Harbor.” It may have taken longer
than expected todeliver the old Comparator
because of adding one new feature to Bush’s 1938
design. The “locator” performed afunction the
navy had thought of adding inthe late 1930s. It
allowed the use of a transverse tape to find more
complex pattern matches than was possible with

Page 48

 

 

the original system. With the locator, the code-
breakers could quickly identify which messages
held important code or cipher groups.”*

—(S}-In the private language of the codebreak-
ers, “locating” was aBrute Force approach to
finding possible “depths.”

(U) Once inaction in mid-1942, the old
Comparator did help crack the Japanese naval
attaché cipher machine, but the Comparator’s
newest punch also malfunctioned.” In addition,
the machine’s bad temper called for a visit by one
ofthe MIT men, Larry Steinhardt, who had to
simplify the device to achieve reliability.”

(U) The Search for the Second Comparator

(U) While struggling with the old
Comparator, the young men at MIT paid atten-
tion toits new microfilm version. In early
November 1941, the MIT-NDRC group was so
positive about the future ofa microfilm
Comparator that Bush obtained another signifi-

—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINFTREL—-FO-UG AAG -GAN-GBR-AND-NEE DG
FOP-SEGRETICOMINTHREE-TC-USA,AUS-CAN GBR AND NZCIAT—

cant grant from the NDRC.” Then, although the
NDRC was not supposed to be involved in pro-
duction, Howard awarded a $25,000 contract to
National Cash Register’s electronics laboratory.
Joe Desch agreed to build as many as thirty
copies of the sets of new high-speed counters and
fast printers needed for the future microfilm
Comparators. *

(U) Ina November 1941 meeting, it was
declared that construction was ready to begin on
the next Comparator. Expecting to see the newest
Comparator in a few months and viewing the MIT
group as a long-term resource, the OP-20-G ana-
lysts outlined needs for other devices. One of
those outlines had a hidden significance. It would
connect the MIT men to the Ultra Secret although
they did not know of Britain’s ability to crack the
Enigma nor ofthe critical negotiations between
OP-20-G and Britain over sharing intelligence
secrets.

(U) Not Equal Partners in Ultra

(U) Agreements were made at the very high-
est levels in1g940 and 1941 for Britain and
America to share cryptanalytic methods as well as
the military information that came from signals
intelligence. However, England’s wizards did not
have amathematical solution tothe Enigma!
Without good guesses asto key words in mes-
sages and knowledge of the inner workings of the
Enigma radio networks, Britain could, and
would, become deaf.”?

-~C//REE) Perhaps it was the fragility of the
solutions that made the British somewhat less

willing to share their secrets with the Americans.
Whatever the reason, the Americans began to
think it was necessary to have their own anti-
Enigma capability. In late 1940, OP-20-G shifted
their one professional cryptanalyst, who had just
made the first entries into the Japanese fleet
code, tothe German problems. The venerable
Agnes Meyer Driscoll and three young navy offi-
cers began an attack onthe frustrating German

—TOP-SECRETHECMINTHREL-FO-USA-kUS-GAN—GBR-AND-NZEHI

naval Enigma. However, they made little progress
toward what the Americans needed, a purely
mathematical cryptanalytic solution.

(U) Although she had helped break into simi-
lar devices, was informed of some ofthe British
methods, and labored for almost a year, Driscoll
could not find the ways and means for an
American Enigma solution. Fortunately, she was
willing to ask for help. During the November 1941
meeting between MIT and OP-20-G, she
described her needs, and Howard was asked to
think of ways to automate
her “problem.” She was
determined to devel-
opa method more
permanent than
the ones Britain
had chosen.
Apparently,
that called for
a machine
somewhat dif-
ferent from the
Comparator.
Howard
accepted _ the
responsibility,
and Driscoll was Fj
happy with the
promises by the
young men from
MIT.*°

   
  

© Agnes Meyer

(U) Another Machine That Wouldn't

(U) The cordial meeting with Howard in early
November 1941 impressed OP-20-G’s people. But
OP-20-G and the Bureau of Ships became very
worried and skeptical about university work
when, just afew days after the Washington con-
ference,** Howard wrote the navy that experi-
ments were showing the new Comparator’s
microfilm tobe deforming when used in test

Page 49
“TOP-SECRETHCONINTHREE FO -USA-AUG-CAN-GBR-end-NzL

assemblies. The navy must have wondered how it
could have taken the MIT group so many years to
discover its primary technological assumption
was untenable. They may also have asked how
OP-20-G’s need for revolutionary cryptanalytic
devices could be fulfilled if the responsibility con-
tinued to be left in the hands of the inexperienced
NDRC and the young MIT students — people who
failed to test underlying assumptions before wast-
ing a critical year’s work.

(U) The Revenge of Mechanics: the First
Rounds

(U) While John Howard had been facing up to
the failures of photo-optics and electronics, some
practical men were creating immediate “mechan-
ical” solutions tocryptanalytic problems.
Beginning inlate 1940, the engineers inthe
army’s and navy’s cryptanalytic branches began
to work closely with IBM and its engineers. The
outcome was the first operational special-pur-
pose cryptanalytic machine and the first of a long
and important series of modifications to IBM’s
standard offerings.

CFS7/54/-REB) By spring 1941, the army
had its Gee Whizzer working on the transpo-
sition ciphers of several nations, and the navy
was about to receive the first ofits special
IBM Navy Change Machines. *

CESHSELREL) Logs and Relays — the
Gee Whizzer

CSH/SU/REL) The Gee Whizzer had

been the first to arrive. In its initial version it
did not look impressive; it was just a box con-
taining relays and telephone system type
rotary switches. But when it was wired to one
of the tabulating machines, it caused amaze-
ment and pride. Although primitive and ugly,
it worked and saved hundreds ofhours of
dreadful labor needed to penetrate an impor-
tant diplomatic target. It proved so useful

that a series of larger and more sophisticated

Page 50

“Whizzers” was constructed during the war. The
last of the four versions had an electronic matrix
and was in operation throughout the decade. The
navy admired the Whizzer so much that it built its
own version, the Jeep.*?

€FS77/S17/7REE) The Gee Whizzer was born
because ofa specific problem that arose in early
1941. It was the Japanese diplomatic service that
had caused the SIS group to search for a new type
of technological solution. When the Japanese
made one of their diplomatic “transposition” sys-
tems much more difficult to solve through hand
anagramming (reshuffling columns of code until
they made “sense”), the American army did not
have the manpower needed to apply the tradi-
tional hand tests.

€87/517/7RED) Friedman’s response was to
try to find away tofurther automate what had

become astandard approach to mechanically

testing for meaningful decipherments. His search
did not include electronics. Rather, he told Leo
Rosen to find quick ways to extend the power of

 

(TS//SI) Gee Whizzer

TORSECRETICOMINTIREL—TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GER-AND-NZ HN
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA AUS-CAN-GBRAND NZLHRT

the IBM machines that were beginning to arrive
at his offices in greater numbers. Rosen’s first
task was tolearn how automatic anagramming
worked.

CISY/SI//REL) One ofthe most traditional

ways of hiding the plain language oreven the
codes in a message was to transpose the columns
of the text. With columns moved around in a ran-
dom way, it was very difficult for those who might
intercept a message to realign the text to its orig-
inal order. The old hand attack had been to move
one column after another against each other with
an analyst making continuous judgments as to
whether the new alignments were building
towards ameaningful plain language arrange-
ment. That was atedious and time-consuming
process.

(IS//SHAREL) During the 1930s the SIS had
made some progress towards easing the analysts’

burdens. Statistical studies of various languages
had been made and a system of weights had been
calculated. Turned into “logs”(logarithms) so that
addition rather than multiplication could be used
to build scores for combinations of letters, log
weights were assigned to each letter ina trans-
posed message. Aseach ofthe columns was
rearranged, the weights were summed and an
evaluation was made asto whether the sum
approached that expected for a column of plain-
text. Ifthe logarithms of the statistically expected
frequencies ofthe combinations were high, it
indicated that the correct order ofthe text
columns had been found. The results were dou-
ble-checked by an analyst to see ifthe realigned
columns made plain-language sense.

CSAS REL) The log weight method had

been implemented onthe tabulating machines,
but the process entailed much special card-
punching and many runs ofthe cards to align all
the columns. Worse, the tabulator method did
not include an automatic test for plain-language
“build-up.” That meant that bad column
sequences might be run for too long and, worse,

FOP-GEGREHIGGMINFHREL-T0-U6 A wil, -CAN-GBR-ANB-NZEHKT

all results were printed out. All of those usually
worthless printouts had tobe examined by an
analyst.

(U) The method worked, but it was very, very
labor intensive even with the use of tabulators. It
took too much time to feed the round after round
of cards that were required to test all columns of
atransposed message against all others.

(FEH-GH-REL) Rosen and the IBM consult-
ants realized that not much could be done about
the cards; there was noother viable memory
medium. But it was thought that it might be pos-
sible to eliminate all but significant results from
being printed. Rosen and his men, with the per-
mission and help of IBM, turned the idea into the
first and very simple Gee Whizzer. The Whizzer’s
two six-point, twenty-five-position rotary switch-
es signalled the tabulator when the old log values
that were not approaching acriterion value
should be dropped from its counters. Then they
instructed the tabulator to start building up a new
plain-language indicator value.

(FS4544REL) Simple, inexpensive, and
quickly implemented, the Gee Whizzer reinforced
the belief among the cryptoengineers in
Washington that practical and evolutionary
changes were the ones that should be given sup-
port.

(U) The Navy Gets Some Changes

CEHFFOTO) OP-20-G’s enlisted grade in-
house engineers felt the same way and argued for
the help they needed toturn their imaginative
ideas for true cryptanalytic machines into hard-
ware. Their requests reached the office of the
Director of Naval Communications and in mid-
1941 Captain Redmond informed them that he
had used his personal influence to get IBM’s Tom
Watson to agree to help the navy.

G+FEEO) AnIBM executive immediately
came to Washington, listened to the ideas of Pete

Page 51
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA AUS; CAN, OBR ard NZbet—

Deffert and Lou Holland, and gave his blessing to
their hopes for advances more radical than just
attaching relay boxes to standard machines. An
IBM engineer was soon assigned to duty at “G,”
and he began to refine the navy engineers’ sug-
gestions and to forward them to IBM’s designers.

—~CSHSUYRED) Within a few months the first
Naval Change (NC) was up and running. The NC-
1 automatically sensed the beginning of a series of
cards and then punched anincreasing _ serial
number in each successive card. IBM delivered a
more complex machine just afew weeks later.
The new automatic cross-footer also worked from
the day it was installed. It provided a high-speed
means of decrypting additive cipher systems,
such as those used by the Japanese Navy.

(U) The NC series was continued throughout
the war. The thirteen different machines became
progressively more complex, but each worked,
and none were burdens to the maintenance engi-
neers at “G.” °4

(U) The Greatest Kludge of All, But It
Worked

~SHSHAFREB) The navy’s enlisted men were
involved in something more ambitious: the con-

struction ofthe mechanical contraption that
worked, the M4. The Washington Code and
Signal Section’s electricians and machinists put
fifty wheels, each having thirty contacts and ten
stepping notches, together with ten banks of
lights and aset ofhand cranks, to provide an
automatic way to identify what additives had
been used in Japanese messages. The machine
exploited a weakness in Japanese systems ~ all
the code groups had to be divisible by three.

(SUSL//REL}- To find alikely additive, ten
code groups were set onthe machine; then the

additive was entered with the cranks, and finally
the machine was ordered to find out how many of
the resulting deciphered code groups were divisi-

Page 52

ble by three. The lights told the operator which
groups were “over,” “under,” or “divisible.” °°

(U) Trying to Save Bush’s Reputation

(U) John Howard was probably not told of the
triumphs of the practical navy engineers and the
old technologies, but he knew that he had to do
something tosave Bush’s dream. Hecame up
with avery rudimentary substitute for the film
comparator.

(U) He advised the bureau that photographic
plates could be substituted for microfilm.*
Although very pessimistic, Howard did not give
upon the Comparator entirely. But the new
Comparator project seemed tobe another very
embarrassing disaster. The bureau certainly was
unhappy, and the navy’s cryptanalysts thought
they might be left out ofthe electronics revolu-
tion.

(U) Bush was upset that his plans for elec-
tronic cryptanalysis were introuble. There was
almost nothing to show for a decade’s work. And
John Howard’s bad news could not have come at
a worse time for the navy. He made his confession
about the microfilm Comparator just as the
American intelligence agencies were frantically
searching for the final clues towhere Japan
would attack. In a few weeks OP-20-G had to face
the consequences ofthe failure to predict Pearl
Harbor. But a combination of factors gave Bush’s
young men yet another chance. The ability of
Howard to continue on independently (because
he had ayear’s NDRC funding remaining) was
important, but a more significant reason was the
combination of the return of Joseph Wenger and
the political influence of Vannevar Bush.

(UV) Yet Another Chance

(U) Wenger returned from sea duty in the
summer of 1941. Although assigned to OP-20’s
war plans section,®” he contacted the cryptana-
lysts and Bush about the outcome of the year of

FSP-GEGREFIGOMNTHREL-TO-USA- AUS CAN-GBROANE NZEIAE
TOP SECRE HICOMINTTREL TO USK, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZEH—

NDRC work. After hearing of the situation, and
despite Howard’s bad news, Wenger talked with
his contacts at OP-20-G and pleaded for a contin-
uation of the relationship with MIT.* His urging
and the navy’s dread of alienating the head of the
NDRC, Vannevar Bush, allowed Safford to begin
a program that would be vastly expanded when
Wenger was sent back to OP-20-G in early 1942.

(U) When the Ciphers Can’t Be Broken

(U) Wenger’s influence at OP-20-G was the
result of his long involvement in modernizing
naval communications. He had a reputation as an
expert inall communications fields. He was
America’s leading advocate ofa high-tech alter-
native to cryptanalysis. In the 1930s, Wenger pre-
dicted that unless massive breakthroughs were
made in cryptanalysis, such as the construction of
a full range of Rapid Machines, it would be fool-
ish torely upon direct communications intelli-
gence such as codebreaking. Until America built a
truly innovative mathematical cryptanalytic
capability, he argued, other signals intelligence
resources had tobe exploited. Wenger argued
that codes and ciphers were becoming too com-
plex to crack with available techniques, and, as
important, anenemy’s frequent changes of sys-
tems would always create blackouts atthe most
critical moments. °?

(U) Wenger had become America’s advocate
for what became known as “traffic analysis.” He
had spent years studying and developing T/A. In
traffic analysis, the concern was not with the con-
tent of messages but with the easily identified
callsigns of senders and receivers, the timing and
numbers of messages in a network, and the shifts
in patterns of transmissions. °° Although not as
glamorous orexciting as cryptanalysis, _ traffic
analysis was not a low-tech activity.

(U) Many aspects of T/A called for more eso-
teric and expensive hardware than traditional
codebreaking. The method depended upon
sophisticated direction finders to locate enemy

TOP SECRETICOMINT/REL TO USK, AUS CAN GBR AND NZ

stations and onother expensive radio equip-
ment.” It was also very demanding interms of
personnel and data processing equipment.

(U) The first step for T/A was the ability to
intercept enough messages. Revolutionary auto-
matic scanners searched for active channels,
oscilloscopes helped identify stations and opera-
tors, and very sensitive receivers plotted trans-
missions.?* The hardware was not the end of it,
however. Optimal radio interception and plotting
called for advice from physicists; the exploitation
of the intercepts needed advanced statistical-ana-
lytical techniques. The intercepts and location
estimates had to be correlated and subjected to
time-consuming analysis. The tabulators were
frequently called upon to compile the necessary
interaction matrices. The expense and manpower
T/A needed seemed worthwhile. Wenger’s recon-
struction of Japanese naval maneuvers from T/A
analysis during the mid-1930s was a triumph.

(U) By 1940 OP-20-G’s intercept crews were
logging thousands of messages a month from the
Pacific and the Atlantic, and the method was con-
sidered essential. The SIS had also begun to
appreciate T/A and sent its top men to the Canal
Zone and Hawaii to establish intercept and pro-
cessing sites. Those investments were
inescapable. With America and Britain unable to
read the most important German systems, T/A
was the only hope in the West.

(U) T/A had its limits, however. It could not
reveal long-term plans; it gave just a picture of
immediate intentions. It had other imperfections
as well. The most important was a dependency on
very frequent communications. Ifa station did
not broadcast, it could not be identified and locat-
ed. Tragically, in1942 T/A was unable to deal
with the German submarine onslaught because
the submarines off the American coast followed a
routine of radio silence.

Page 53
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL—-FO-UGA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-and-NZLIX1

(©) Wenger to the Rescue

(U) Joseph Wenger’s influence at OP-20-G
was not diminished by the failure of T/A to live up
to its promise. In 1942 he was granted the power
he needed to implement his plan for a centralized
organization for naval communications intelli-
gence. Wenger’s ideas were quickly accepted.™
Along with the approval ofhis plan came his
appointment asthe operating head of “G.” In
February 1942 he began to reorganize “G” and to
revive Hooper's dream ofbringing science and
cryptanalysis together.

(U) But those were difficult times for Wenger.
Inearly 1942 the U-boats began to slaughter
dozens of freighters insight ofthe American
coast. The U-boat threat to the Atlantic convoys
was growing so fast that acontinuation ofthe
sinkings threatened Britain’s survival. Britain was
unable to penetrate the new naval four-wheel
Enigma, and OP-20-G remained without any
power over German systems.

(V) Mathematics to Meet the Great
Challenge

(U) The Atlantic crisis had a strange impact
on OP-20-G’s future. It both helped and hindered
Wenger's crusade for the Rapid Machines. In its
first phases, the crisis aided him. As part of his
outline for the expansion of OP-20-G, Wenger
had planned for the creation of a special research
group. Its mission was to apply formal mathe-
matics to cryptanalysis. OP-20-G had never
before had a professionally trained mathematical
team. In February 1942 Wenger brought together
the few professional mathematicians who had
already been called to service and had them join
the “M” section. Of significance for World War II
and the history of the Rapid Machines, they were
handed more than mathematical responsibilities.
They were ordered totake onsome technical
radio problems. In addition, they were given
some of the responsibility for the critical German
systems.

Page 54

(U) Next, the “M” section was handed
Wenger’s pet, the Rapid Machines project.
Luckily, Wenger found the right man, Howard
Engstrom, to direct the third major attempt to
make optics and electronics into cryptanalytic
tools. When first called for the war crisis,
Engstrom was asked to give advanced technical
advice to OP-20-G’s radio intercept and direction
finding group. That T/A assignment was a very
important and demanding post. But heading “M”
turned out to be much more ofa challenge. The
new job called for political as well as technical
skills. By spring 1942 the Rapid Machines had
again become political creatures.

(U) The apparent failure of Howard’s 1941
microfilm Comparator had not ended his work or
the interest of OP-20 in cryptanalytic machinery.
But it did reopen the old battles over control of
innovation in the navy.

(U) Bureaucracy ws. Science, Again

(U) Pearl Harbor, despite the blame hurled at
the army and navy intelligence agencies, led to
the release of funds and energies for cryptanaly-
sis. For the first time in its history, OP-20-G had
enough money to pursue technological dreams.
In response, in early 1942, Safford, still the head
of OP-20-G, initiated a survey of needs and wrote
out awish list that included Rapid Machines.
There was enough money to explore all options.
The first choice of the operating cryptanalysts was
IBM electromechanical machinery. They asked
for more standard equipment and for the devel-
opment ofa host of special attachments. Safford,
not yet having an “M” section, and very short of
personnel, turned to the Bureau of Ships for tech-
nical and administrative help.

(U) He found it easy to convince the bureau to
deal with the trustworthy IBM. Very soon, the
Bureau of Ships established what it saw as a har-
monious three-way relationship between IBM,
the old hands at “G,” and itself.
—TOR-SEGRETIGOMNTHRELFO-UEA-AUS,-GAN-GBR-AND Nei

(U) Inthe first weeks of1942 the bureau
decided to allow OP-20-G to invest navy funds in
anexploration of Rapid Machines, but it
demanded aheavy price, one which included a
radical change in the relationship between MIT's
men and the navy. The bureau’s men, not those
from OP-20-G, were torun the technical and
financial parts ofthe program. Above all, the
bureau wanted the projects out ofthe halls of
MIT. Its officers demanded that all work be done
by established corporations that followed the
navy’s standard procedures. But in early 1942 it
began to take charge of the NDRC project, giving,
it thought, badly needed managerial direction.

(U) Meanwhile, the bureau explored ways to
decrease its dependency on Bush’s group. Then
the bureau decided to show its power. It took the
Comparator away from Bush and MIT. In March
1942 Bush’s structure for linking the military and
academia, atleast for cryptanalytic machines,
began to be dismantled. The work at MIT, per-
haps with the exception ofthe designing ofa
punch, was ended, and the secret workshop was
shut down!

(U) A Seeming Victory for Science

(U) Assoon as Wenger had returned to “G”
and learned of the bureau’s actions, he feared that
the corporate projects would produce machines
the cryptanalysts could not use. Wenger began an
attempt to shift power back to OP-20-G. A search
was begun for experienced engineers to augment
the “M” group. By the end of 1942 OP-20-G had
some of the leading men in computer electronics.
Through formal and informal means, the name
“M” came to mean machinery as well as mathe-
matics. °°

(U) Wenger convinced the bureau to give OP-
20-G’s Rapid Machine program near autonomy
as well as its own facility and workforce. But it
took a major intelligence crisis to achieve that.
Wenger would not have been so successful and
there would not have been a Naval Computing

—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA, AUS-CAN-GBICAND NZL

Machine Laboratory atthe NCR factory in
Dayton, Ohio, if the British had been able to con-
quer the German submarine Enigma system or if
the White House had insisted that OP-20-G
remain dependent on Britain’s Ultra.

(U) The establishment ofthe Naval
Computing Machine Laboratory and _ the
increased power of the Rapid Machine group did
help OP-20-G tobuild aseries of innovative
cryptanalytic machines, including the American
version of the Bombe. By the end of the war, the
American navy had some ofthe world’s most
advanced electronic machines.

(U) Notes

1.(U) Arecent study of the messages intercepted
by the Americans in 1941 concludes that if there had
been the manpower todecode all the messages it
would have been clear that Pearl Harbor was a target.
Frederick D. Parker, “The Unsolved Messages of Pearl
Harbor,” Cryptologia 13 (1991): 295.

2.(U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford
Caldwell Hooper: March 3, 1933 toJanuary 1, 1935,
Correspondence with Redman and Jewett: “Contact
scientists”; June 1, 1934, “Binaural Sons of C”; October
20, 1935, “Travel to Laboratories’; Box 18, Hooper to
Secret Naval Board, “Communications Plan,”
February 7, 1936; June 10, 1935, “McDowell, Contact
scientists”; and November 20, 1935, “Travel to
Boston.” Navy Biographies Section OI-140, 27 April
1945, “Rear Admiral Stanford C. Hooper, U.S. Navy,
Deceased.” NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 269.

3.(U) Note that Hooper’s plan came almost a
decade before the British began their now famous
project at Bletchley Park todevelop automata for
cryptanalysis. For anexample ofthe results of his
efforts to modernize OP-20-G, NARA RG457, SRMN-
083, “Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,” January 8,
1938, by Joseph N. Wenger.

4.(U) The navy did not include signals intelligence
inits formal war plans until 1937. NARA RG457,
SRMN-084, “The Evolution of the Navy’s Cryptologic
Organization,” 3.On the attacks against military and

Page 55
—TOR-SECRETICOMATHREL-FO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR am RELINT—

diplomatic codes inthe early 1930s, NARA RG457,
SRH-159, “Preliminary Historical Report of the
Solution ofthe ‘B’ Machine,” 12. RG457, SRH-355,
“Naval Security Group History to World War Hi,” 82.
NARA RG457, SRH-305, “The Undeclared War: The
History of RI,” 15 November 1943, by Laurance F.
Safford, Captain, U.S. Navy.

5.(U) See Harold G. Bowen, Ships, Machinery
and Mossbacks: The Autobiography ofa Naval
Engineer (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1954), on the battle over high-pressure steam and for-
mation of combined bureau in 1939. NARA RG457,
SRMN-084, “The Evolution of the Navy's Cryptologic
Organization,” 3. A very useful survey is David Kahn,
“Roosevelt, Magic and Ultra,” Cryptologia 16 (1992):
289-319.

6.(U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford
Caldwell Hooper: June 10, 1935, “McDowell, Contact
scientists”; November 20, 1935, “Travel to Boston”;
Box 18, “Johns Hopkins Atomic Energy,” November 3,
1937; and March 3,1933 toJanuary 1, 1935,
Correspondence with Redman, Jewett, “Contact scien-
tists.” NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War II,” 268-269.

7.(U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 269, “Hooper to
Wenger” November 1935, 270. January 2, 1936, “Bush
Report.” Office of Naval Research, Bush Comparator
Patent file, #2,873,912.

8.(U) Athorough search of the OP-20-G archives
and the holdings of the NRL and, by implication, those
of the Bureau of Ships, did not lead to the recovery of
acopy of the original outline or Bush’s first sketches of
the Comparator. *8) However, citations tothe Bush
documents were located on the old catalog cards of the
NSA Technical Library. NSA, CCH, Card Catalog for
Technical Library: Correspondence File: Bush
Comparator 1936-38; Early Comparator Design
Proposals: Bush Comparator 1936-37; Machine
Proposals and Miscellaneous Material: Bush
Comparator, 1936-1938; Navy Correspondence File
and Historical Summary Bush Comparator, 1936-45;
Six Project Reports: Bush Comparator, 1937-8; Bush
Comparator Drawing #1-87 and Index, 1937;
Summary of Materials on Symmetrical Sequences:
Bush Comparator; Bush Comparator Drawings #88-

Page 56

153, 1937. f[g005]. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Memoranda onSIS, Formation of Cryptanalytic
Group” from CCH Series XIK, Box 13, cirea 1929-
1939-

9.(U) NSA RAM File, January 28, 1936, DNC to
Bureau of Ships, “Support Bush proposals,” and July
21, 1936, Bureau of Engineering to OP-20-G, “BuEng
refuses Bush.” NARA RGq57, SRH-355, “Naval
Security Group History to World War LI,” 269.

10. (U) There is some indication the Bureau’s men
eventually outlined their solution, but no documents
have been released. In the absence of any specifics, one
can only guess at their alternative. Wenger remarked
that the Bureau never really understood what he want-
ed. NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War II,” 269.

11, (U) Susan M. Lujan, “Agnes Meyer Driscoll,”
Cryptologia 5 (4991): 47. James Rusbridger and Eric
Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit
Books, 1991). Cipher A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh,
Machine Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis
(Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985), 218. NARA
RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group History to
World War I,” 161, 247. The Holtwick M-1 machine
was in operation by mid-1937, perhaps earlier.

12. (U) Jeff Wenger interview with W.S.
MacDonald, March 19901.

13. (U) Interviews with Waldron S. MacDonald.
NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War II,” 404.

14. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand ,Trial Records,
Carton 67, William Radford, “Report on An
Investigation of the Practicality of Developing a Rapid
Computing Machine,” October 15, 1939, Appendix III,
List of Numbered References. Hagley Museum and.
Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand ,
Trial Records, NCR Depositions, Bush to Deeds
“Analyzing Equipment,” May 19, 1938. Radford had
been one ofthe “boys” at MIT who survived on the
1930s version of “soft money” being a research assis-
tant there from 1932 to 1939. Caldwell put him to work
on the Rapid Arithmetical problem in early 1937, and
he produced his report on “The  Practicality of
Developing a Rapid Calculating Machine,” October 15,
1939. Rockefeller Archives, Papers of Warren Weaver,

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USH, AUS, CAN, OBR AND NZL
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TOUSA, AUS, CAN GBR ANE NZDT

January 16, 1946, letter, S.H. Caldwell to Weaver,
“Center of Analysis,” 4.

15. (U) The machine did not have aname_ until
some years later. Who borrowed the name
Comparator from the nineteenth century MIT device
remains unknown.

16. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 208, 247.

17. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of
Engineering, “Plugboards for Reproducing Punch,”
July 7,1936. NSA, Lou Holland, “Development of
Machine Processing in the Naval Security Group,” 9.
Holtwick had created several small mechanical
machines that cost less than $300 each for Japanese
problems. The Bureau helped build them. NARA
RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group History to
World War II,” 210, 257, 261.

18. (U) The patent claim was filed on April 22,
1937. William F. Friedman and Vernon E. Whitman,
Electric Control System for Tabulating Cards,
Documents and the Like, U.S. Patent 2,224,646,
December 10, 1940.

19. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-274, “Military
Cryptanalysis.” NARA SRH-004, “The Friedman
Lectures on Cryptology.”

20. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma, (Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 87, and Cipher A. Deavours,
“The Black Chamber: AColumn: LaMethode Des
Baton,” Cryptologia,4 (1980): 240-247. There are
reports that the Americans, including the Coast Guard
group charged with attacking the ciphers of the rum-
runners, were able to break into the simple commer-
cial version of the Enigma during the 1920s. Malcolm
F. Willoughby, Rum War at Sea ,(Washington: GPO,
1964).

21. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma, (Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 141.

22. (U) W.S. MacDonald Interviews.

23. (U) Letter toauthor from MIT registrar's
office. In his first interview, MacDonald stated that he
went to MIT in June 1937. But in his second interview
he cited September as the month he began his duties.
I have accepted the second date because it makes more
sense in light ofthe previous pace of the work and
MacDonald’s desire to also enroll in the graduate pro-
gram in the department.

‘TOP SECRETTICOMINTTREL TO USA, AUS; CAN-GBRAND NZL —

24. (U) Paul F. Ceruzzi, Reckoners: The Prehistory
of the Digital Computer (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
Press, 1983).

25. (U) Michael R. Williams, A History of
Computing Technology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1985). Nancy Stern, From ENIAC to
UNIVAC: An Appraisal of The Eckert-Mauchly
Computers (Bedford, Mass.: Digital Press, 1981).

26. (U) Because the Comparator read ten data
columns at a time, more sophisticated IC tests could be
done at the same rate as single letter tallying. Bush and
Wenger may not have realized the potentials of the
modified tabulators. The Comparator had five coun-
ters asdid tabulators. Thus, several fields could be
processed in parallel. The navy may not have analyzed
all the (n*(n-1)) combinations, but may have been sat-
isfied with only a portion of the possible offsets of the
messages.

27. (U) Insome systems, messages were much,
much longer. Thinking their Fish system was beyond
attack, the Germans sent very lengthy reports on it. F.
H. Hinsley etal., British Intelligence inthe Second
World War Vol. IH,1 (London: Her Majesty's
Stationery Office, 1984), Appendix 2, 477.

28. (U) Bush gave about one second for each line
of printing. This time was estimated via the descrip-
tion inthe NSA RAM File, “M.A.C. Outlines # 17,
70mm Comparator,” and my knowledge of the 1938
Comparator.

29. (U) Table 7.1 shows the power of various
devices, including the Comparator (run at various pro-
jected speeds) relative to tabulators operating at their
typical 120 comparisons a minute. Acell entry in the
table gives the worth ofthe alternative machine in
terms of the hypothetical raw power of the number of
tabulators. Thus, asorter running at full speed was
worth three tabulators while the speed of a typical tele-
type system of the era was five times greater than the
tabulators.

30. (U) Ontape speeds and densities, Hagley
Museum and Library, Accession 2015, Remington-
Rand, ERA materials, S. Ruebens, “Investigation of
Solid Acoustic Delay Lines,” Contract Nobs 28476,
August 1, 1947, 1. The Colossus read at 5,000 charac-
ters asecond. Brian Randell (ed.), The Origins of
Digital Computers: Selected Papers (New York:

Page 57
“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TOUSA, AUS, CAN-GBR and NZE

Springer-Verlag, 1982), 349. Itis not certain that this
means that 5,000 serial characters passed the reading
head ofits tape scanner. The Robinsons, the British
versions of the tape-optical machines (but ones for
binary comparisons), read at 2,000 asecond. Tape
readers used bythe navy in WWII ran atabout ten
characters asecond. The 1948 figure isin Samuel S.
Snyder, “Abner: The ASA Computer, Part I: Design,” NS4
Technical Journal 25 (1980), 59.

31. (U) Avery important spinoff ofthe navy
Comparator was a 1938 project at NCR. Desch used
35mm film with punched holes on an optical compar-
ing device for autilities billing machine. Hagley
Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand Trial Records, August 16, 19038, Desch to
Williams, “Laboratory work” and August 30, 1939,
Desch to Williams “Work at Laboratory.”

32. (U) Bernard Williams, “Computing With
Electricity, 1935-1045,” (Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Kansas, 1984). Final OSRD Report, Div. 17, George E.
Beggs Jr. and F.L. Yust, “Development and
Application of Electronic Counting Circuits,” 1946,
especially Chapter 9.

33. (U) Several late 1930s projects at MIT explored
magnetic memory and many variations of storage
based on electrical charges. See Hagley Museum and
Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand
Trial Records, Carton 67, William Radford “Report on
An Investigation ofthe Practicality of Developing a
Rapid Computing Machine, October 15, 1939.”

34. (U) William Aspray (ed.), Computers Before
Computing (Ames, Ia.: lowa State University Press,
1990).

35. (U) Michael K. Buckland, “Emanuel Goldberg,
Electronic Document Retrieval, and Vannevar Bush’s
Memex,” JASIS 43 (1992): 284. On the 1937 and 1940
patents and their history, Hagley Museum and
Library, Accession 2015, unprocessed ERA materials
from Sperry Archive, November 1, 1949, Memo to File,
Selector Infringement Search, and Accession 1825,
Honeywell v Sperry-Rand Trial Records, August 13,
1937, Bush to Deeds, and October 25, 1937, Research
Corporation to Deeds.

36. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of
Engineering, “Rapid Equipment,” March 29, 1938.

Page 58

37. (U) Adensity often oreleven per inch was
assumed asindicated bythe description of the later
army version of 1944 which reached twelve and one-
half per inch with an average over the entire tape of six
and one-quarter per inch. On the cost of the Eastman
tape, NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War II,” 276, and NSA RAM File,
CNO to Bureau of Engineering, April 29, 1938.

38. (U) Inlater models ofthe Comparator, the
stepping could be from one to ten characters after each
pass. NSA RAM File, “M.A.C. Outlines #17, 7omm
Comparator,” April, 1947.

39. (U) Howard Aiken's early computer, the ASCC,
used atape rig similar tothe one chosen for the
Comparator. During World War I] the Americans and
the British also used a pulley and loop system for the
follow-ons to the Comparators, indicating that it was a
sound method. Michael R. Williams, A History of
Computing Technology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1985), 245. Brian Randell, “Colossus:
Grandfather of the Computer,” in B. Randell (ed.), The
Origins of Digital Computers (New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1982), 350.

40. (U) Interviews with W. S. MacDonald.

41. (U) Paul F. Ceruzzi, Reekoners: The Prehistory
of the Digital Computer (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
Press, 1983). Charles §. Bashe, etal., IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985), 36-
39.

42. (U) Waldron MacDonald claimed he had to
rework all the circuits and that binary switching
speeds did not exceed 5,000 per second. MacDonald
interviews, 1987-1991.

43. (U) The navy’s later Letterwriters and its
Copperheads used a modified baudot coding. NSA
RAM File: “Machine Comparisons,” June 1946;
Communications Intelligence Technical Paper 42,
“Copperhead I Theory and Copperhead | Equipment”;
and Communications Intelligence Paper 41,
“Copperhead I Punch and Copperhead I Scanner.”

44. (U) NSA RAM File, July 18, 1938, Safford to
Bush, “Machinery Arrived.”

45. (U) NSA RAM File, Wenger Report, “Bush
Visit” April 25, 1938. Waldron S.MacDonald_ inter-
views. NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War I,” 299.

TOR SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS,CAN, GBR AND NZLIX1
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN GB RAND NZ

46. (U) Interviews with Waldron S. MacDonald,
1987-1991.

47. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Vannevar
Bush, Box 67, MacDonald to Bush, July 25, 1939. And
interviews with MacDonald.

48. (U) Office of Research and Inventions patent
application sheet of 10-29-46 lists April 1938 as the
time of the first successful witnessed run. ONR, patent
file for Bush Comparator, #2,873,912.

49. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War U,” 272, 276. NSA RAM
File, OP-20-G toBureau of Engineering. “Rapid
Equipment,” April 29, 1938, and May 17, 1938,
“Comparator Equipment.”

50. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-151, “Military Study:
Communication Intelligence Research Activities,”
022, indicates that the first Bush machine was paid for
out ofa special fiscal 1938 allocation. The proposed
budget for 1939 contained arequest for a similar
amount, but it may have been for a “payback” for the
first expenditure.

51. (U) NRA RAM File, September 16, 1938, OP-
20-G Bureau of Ships, “Budget Request.”

52. (U) The exact amounts spent and budgeted for
the Comparator in 1938 and 1939 remain unknown.
NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History toWorld War II,” 276, 240. The budget
request for fiscal 1939 included items for building new
machines and new components such asa rapid “loca-
tor.” This may have been ameans of locating code
groups, afunction later embodied inthe machines
designed by Lawrence Steinhardt, or it may have been
anautomation ofthe methods ofoverlay sheets to
determine code-wheel orders and setting as used by
Mrs. Driscoll. RAM File, CNO toBureau of
Engineering, September 16, 1938, “Development of
Special Communications Devices.”

53. (U) The machine arrived at the Navy Yard on
June 24. Ithad been badly jostled onthe trip and
refused to run. NSA RAM File, July 18, 1938, OP-20-G
to Bush “Machine Has Arrived.” It took Dulong some
three weeks to tease the machine into its first non-MIT
test run. NRL, Bush Comparator patent application
file, October 29, 1946, 1.

TOP SECRETHCOMINT/REL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZLIX1

54. (U) NSA RAM File, July 18, 1938, Safford to
Bush, “Machinery Arrived.” NRL patent application
file, October 29, 1946, 1.

55. (U) NSA RAM File, May 17, 1938, “Comparator
Equipment,” and July 18, 1938, Safford to Bush,
“Machinery Arrived.”

56. (U) Jack Sweetman, American Naval History
(Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1984), 156.

57. (U) Jeffery M. Dorwart, Conflict of Duty: The
United States Navy's Intelligence Dilemma 1919-1945
(Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1983), 93, 99. NSA
RAM File, OP-20-G to Bureau of Engineering, March
22, 1938 and June 24, 1938, “IBM Purchases.” Cipher
A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography
and Modern Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech
House, 1985}, 212. NSA, Theodore M. Hannah, “Frank
B. Rowlett: A Personal Profile,” 116. Rear Admiral
Edwin T. Layton, And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and
Midway — Breaking the Secrets (New York: William
Morrow, 1985). NARA RG457, SRMD o19, “The
Panay Incident.”

58. (U) NSA RAM File, May 17, 1938, “Comparator
Equipment,” and CNO to Bureau of Engineering,
September 16, 1938, “Development of Special
Communications Devices.”

59. (U) Ironically, MIT would soon provide the
army’s cryptanalytic group with an electrical engineer,
Leo Rosen, who quickly became the leader ofthe
group that constructed amodel of Purple and that
became the electronics research group in the SIS. NSA,
Theodore M. Hannah, “Frank B. Rowlett: A Personal
Profile,” 18.

60. (U) NSA RAM File, Safford to Bush, December
10, 1938, “Fine Job on Comparator.”

61. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355. “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 300.

62. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G, “List of statisti-
cal machinery,” December 1, 1939.

63. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Vannevar
Bush, Box 67, MacDonald File, Bush to MacDonald
“OP-20-G Project,” August 31, 1940. NARA RG457,
SRH-355, “Naval Security Group History to World
War II,” 270, 405.

64. (U) Daniel J. Kevles , The Physicists: The
History ofthe Scientific Community in Modern
America (New York: Knopf, 1978), 206.

Page 59
—FOP-GEGRET/GOMHFHIREL-T0-USA--AUS,-CAN..GBR-and NZLUX1_

65. (U) Ronald W. Clark, Tizard (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1965).

66. (U) Charles S.Bashe, etal., IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985),
Chapter 2.

67. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand , Trial Records April
16, 1942, “Conference on fire-control projects.” The
ENIAC used a “memory” system from RCA that was
quite like what was used onsome OP-20-G and SIS
machines and acounting circuit invented by one of
RCA’s men, Igor Grosdoff. N. Metropolis, et al., (ed.),
AHistory ofComputing inthe Twentieth Century
(New York, 1980), 467. Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand , Trial
Records, May 19, 1938, September 18, 1944. “Army
seizes Grosdoff patent.”

68. (U) Bernard Williams, “Computing With
Electricity, 1935-1945,” (Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Kansas, 1984), 317. Hagley Museum and _ Library,
Accession 1825, Honeywell v Sperry-Rand_ Trial
Records, June 6, 1942, Weaver to participants “Cancel
fire control work.”

69. (U) The fear of defeat was quite real. Bletchley
Park had scores of buses at the ready to race its staff to
port cities where they were to board fast ocean liners
for the United States and Canada.

70. (U) Laurance F. Safford, “Rhapsody in Purple,”
by Dundas P. Tucker, Cryptologia 6 (1981): 196, 220.
NSA, Theodore M. Hannah, “Frank B. Rowlett: A
Personal Profile,” 18. NSA RAM File, Part H of Report
toJ. N. Wenger, Capt. USN, “Resume of the Dayton,
Ohio Activity During World War II,” (presumably a
continuation ofthe Meade Report), 1.In contrast to
Safford’s interpretation and on America’s first contact
with British Enigma achievements, NARA RG457,
SRH-361, “History ofthe Signal Security Agency,
Volume Two, The General Cryptanalytic Problems,”
019-021, 272. NARA RG457, SRH-145, “Report of the
Technical Mission to England,” April 11, 1941, oo2-
004. But on how little Enigma ability OP-20-G had as
late as the summer of 1943, NARA RG457, SRH-403,
“Selections from the Cryptologic Papers of Rear
Admiral J. N. Wenger, USN,” 072-3.

Page 60

71. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, And J Was
There: Pearl Harbor and Midway — Breaking the
Secrets (New York: William Morrow, 1985), 78.

72. (U) NARA RG227, OSRD, Office of the
Chairman, Box 1, Bush to Safford, October 28, 1940,
“Project Agreement.” NSA RAM File, Safford to Radio
Division, Bureau of Ships, November 2, 1940, “Bush
Project.” NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War Il,” 404.

73. (U) NSA RAM File, January 2, 1942, Safford to
Howard, “Comparator Received 12-24,” and January
6, 1942, BuShips to CNO, “Manual for Comparator.”

74. (U) Again, this may also have been a means of
automating the use of the sheets used to attack wheel
settings.

75. (U) The punches were redesigned and reman-
ufactured several times during the war. After MIT
made atry in 1940-41, the Gray manufacturing com-
pany made a version; then NCR redid them; then new
designs were drawn for the postwar era. NSA RAM
File, Communications Intelligence Technical Paper-
42, “Copperhead ITheory and Copperhead I
Equipment.” NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to NCML-NCR,
February, 1945.

76. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security
Group History to World War II,” 430. On Steinhardt
visit, Smithsonian Institution, History of Computers
Project, Interview with Howard Campaigne, 19.

77. (U) Some $25,000 was promised toNCR in
November 1940. Some of it may have come from the
original NDRC grant, but Bush apparently secured an
additional grant for some thirty copies of the counters
although the NDRC was not tobecome involved in
production. NARA Suitland, OSRD Contract Files,
OEM 275 November 28, 1941, “NCR-MIT counters.”
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1825,
Honeywell v Sperry-Rand , Trial Records, December
2,1941, NDRC D3to Desch-NCR, “30 counter print-
ers.”

78. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell vu Sperry-Rand ,Trial Records,
January 29, 1942, Desch toNCR “Secret Work,” and
February 21, 1942, Desch, “Report to Management.”

79. (U) Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story:
Breaking the Enigma Codes (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1982). David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston:

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL-TO US, AUS, CAN; GBR-AND NZtIKt—
TOR-SEGRETICOMNTHREL TOUSA_AUS CAN GBR AND NZL

Houghton-Mifflin, 1991). The role of captures in the
long-awaited break into Japanese army systems is dis-
cussed inthe very impressive Edward J. Drea,
MacArthur’s Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992).

80. (U) Onthe state of American readiness and
some hints about the roles of Mrs. Driscoll and the
team atSIS, compare James Rusbridger and Eric
Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit
Books, 1991), and the more scholarly Edward J. Drea,
MacArthur’s Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992).
NARA RG457, SRH-355, “Naval Security Group
History to World War II,” 440, 442. NSA RAM File,
OP-20-G toOP-20-A, “Meeting with Dr. Howard,”
November 5, 1941. However, Howard was told that the
Driscoll problem was not of high priority. NSA RAM
File, BuShips to Howard, November 11, 1941.

81. (U) NSA RAM File, November 3 and 5, 1941,
Howard OP-20-G Reports on Meetings, and
November 14, 1941, Bureau of Ships to Howard.

82. 4FS448B- M.A.C. Outlines #1, April 1947,
Electroanagrammer (“Gee Whizzer”), stored in CCH
Series XII Z. Leroy Wheatley, “Brief Description of
Analytic Equipment, Fourth Installment,” 20
September 1954, “NC MACHINES,” stored in CCH
Series XII Z.

83. GSASEGRED Samuel S.Snyder, “Famous
First Facts: Part I: Pre-Computer Machine
Cryptanalysis,” unpublished, stored in CCH Series XII
Z. “Gee Whizzer,” circa 1947, stored in CCH Series XII
Z.

84. (U) S. Snyder Interview with Lou Holland,
circa February 2,1972, stored inCCH XIK, Box #10,
Famous First Fact folder. Wheatley, “Brief Description
of Analytic Machines, Fourth Edition,” 20 September
1954, “NC Machines.”

85. (U) NSA S 337/348 “Additive Machines-
Historical Summary Of,” Stored in CCH Series XII Z.
The first M4 was operational atthe end of 1941. It
worked well for a time, but had to be replaced.

86. (U) Photographic plates for data entry had
been used onthe Cinema Integraph and were being
explored for use inthe Analyser and the electronic
computer at the Institute. NSA RAM File, January 5,
1942, Howard to OP-20-G, “Report: Glass Plates.”
Arnold Dumey letters to Brian Randell, 1975, “defor-
mation.”

87. (U) NARA RG457: SRH-279, “OP-20-G File
Communications Intelligence Organization, 1942-46:”
SRMN-084, “The Evolution of the Navy's Cryptologic
Organization,” 2;and SRH-306 “OP-20-G Exploits
and Commendations World War II.”

88. (U) Interview with Jeff Wenger, 1991.

89. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-083, “Military
Study of Secret Radio Calls, January 1938.”

go. (U) All other major nations used the same
techniques and had done sosince World War I, but
Wenger was America’s advocate. NARA RG457,
SRMN-083, “Military Study of Secret Radio Calls,
January 1938.”

91. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-083, “Military Study
of Secret Radio Calls, January 8,1938 byJ. N.
Wenger.”

92. (U} On automatic direction finding equipment.
NARA SRH-197, “US Navy Communications
Intelligence, Organization, Liaison and Collaboration
1941-1945,” 38.

93. (U) Some reports indicate that in late 1941 the
vast majority of the “G” workforce was busy with T/A
rather than cryptanalysis. NARA RG457, SRH-403,
“Selections from the Cryptologic Papers of Rear
Admiral J. N. Wenger, USN.”

94. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-279 “OP-20-G,
Communication Intelligence Organization 1942-
1946.”

95. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-305, “The Undeclared
War: The History of RI,” 15 November 1943, by
Laurance F. Safford, Captain, U.S. Navy.

96. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-403, “Selections from
the Cryptologic Papers of Rear Admiral J. N. Wenger,
USN,” 60. BuShips, NXs329 (945) 5-6-43, Pulse
Spotter Equipment, Philco Corporation. The remain-
der ofthe war. Library of Congress, Papers of
Vannevar Bush, Box 52, Howard to Killian, March 21,
1946, “rapid selector.”

Page 61
This page intentionally left blank

Page 62
~TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL TOUS, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZDIXT

Chapter 3

(U) Bush’s Dream Does Not Come True

 

 

 

(U) A Look Ahead to Peace

(U) America’s entry into the war led to the
release oftorrents of money for codebreaking. A
surprisingly large allocation was given to the
Bureau of Ships for cryptanalytic machine devel-
opment. Unfortunately, “G” and the bureau were
not prepared, and they were unable to immedi-
ately establish a well-coordinated project that
could compensate for the years of lost opportuni-
ties. The funds came too late to set up a long-term
development program, and “G’s” resources had to
bedevoted tocryptanalytic fire-fighting. Until
very late inthe war, OP-20-G’s computer activi-
ties were driven by emergencies. Until late 1943,
“G’s” brilliant mathematicians and engineers did
not even have the time to think of machines that
went beyond Bush’s mid-1930s ideas orto plan
their move from analog to electronic digital tech-
nologies.

(U) After they made their great electro-
mechanical contribution tothe Ultra problem,
the Bombe, they had more time. They built a few
path-breaking digital electronic machines, and
they began to lay plans for along-term computer
program. However, bythe end ofthe war they
had not been able toturn Bush’s faith in micro-
film into advanced and reliable machines.

“Sy One important consequence ofthe
absence of the ultra-fast digital machines was that
Hooper’s dream of relying upon pure statistical
and mathematical cryptanalytical techniques had
tobe deferred. Like England, the United States
had to rely upon the most expedient cryptanalyt-
ic as well as technological solutions. During 1942
and 1943, OP-20-G’s “M” group was unable to
become a think-tank for pure methods. They and
the cryptanalysts had todepend upon “what
worked.” And what worked in cryptanalysis were

“TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL TO USA AUS--CAN-GBROANE-NZEHKT

brute force techniques that called upon massive
data processing and hunch playing. Atthe same
time, the engineers at “G” and the Bureau of Ships
had to choose the easiest hardware solutions to
meet the demands ofthe hard-pressed code-
breakers.

(U) A series of increasingly complex and pow-
erful devices began to emerge in early 1944. But it
was not until 1945 that OP-20-G’s young engi-
neers could begin to think of creating a multipur-
pose Rapid Machine, and when “M” could begin
the exploration ofthe frontiers of mathematical
cryptology. There were more than technical rea-
sons for the gap between what Wenger and
Hooper wanted and what was achieved during
the war. OP-20-G’s World War II machine effort
began incrisis, had torespond to immediate
cryptanalytic needs, and continued to be driven
by rapidly shifting demands.

(U) January 1942: Too Much Too Late

(U) Soon after Pearl Harbor, the bureau
gained the funds to support all the ideas that had
been put forward by the various groups in OP-20-
G and at the Navy Yard. Contracts were let to IBM
for more tabulator equipment and for the cre-
ation of a host of new special attachments. Those
at the bureau and OP-20-G who favored electro-
mechanical equipment received recognition
when IBM was also awarded a very large contract
to develop a set of new machines to automate the
processing of incoming data. At the same time, a
group ofnavy engineers in Washington was
allowed to build some electromechanical analysis
machines of their own design.

(U) The bureau had enough resources to pre-
vent Bush’s Comparator from being locked away
to die in the secret workroom at MIT. The bureau

 

Page 63
Page 64

TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR St NZDIXT—

made anarrangement with Eastman-Kodak to
work onall the microfilm and plate ideas. This
meant that Howard and his group were to be
helpers not supervisors for the teams Eastman
hastily put to turning ideas into machines.* When
Joseph Wenger returned and established the “M”
group under Howard Engstrom, he tried to regain
control over the automatic machines. But it took
some time to organize “M.” In fact, if it had not
been for the crisis in the Atlantic and the attitude
of Ralph Meader, the man the bureau had
assigned to supervise the machine contracts,
Wenger would not have been able to reassert OP-
20-G’s power over machine development.

(U) In the first months of 1942, Meader ran a
freewheeling one-man operation for the bureau.
Despite his freedom, he began to experience the
frustrations that had led Hooper and Bush to try
to throw off the heavy hands of the navy’s bureau-
cracy in the 1930s. He came to feel that the com-
panies were unresponsive, and he compiled a list
of complaints.

(U) A Giant Step Backwards

(U) When the bureau went to Eastman in
early 1942, noone had expected frightening
delays ora need for radical redefinitions of “G’s”
machines. Eastman’s technical and managerial
reputation pointed toa speedy solution to the
problems that had halted the work atthe
Institute. Thus, it was natural for the bureau to
turn to it when Howard seemed to admit that he
could not solve the problems ofthe proposed
microfilm Comparator. But Eastman would not
meet the bureau’s expectations.

(U) With help from John Howard’s men,
Eastman was able to ship the first version of what
became known asthe Index of Coincidence
Machine before 1943.* The IC Machine was a rel-
atively simple plate-based device that looked
more like the early 1930s astronomers’ instru-
ments than Bush’s Comparator.* The IC Machine
did its job, but itwas not automatic, and it was

certainly not a machine that was leading, as were
the Bush designs, to the use of digital circuits.

(U) The machine was electrical, not electron-
ic. Eastman’s team realized that a pulse-based
system, even with the plates, would be too com-
plex. Thus, anelectric measuring system was
built into the IC machine. There was no counting,
just a recognition that enough light had penetrat-
ed to the photocell. The analyst would then tally
the overlapped dots or find their locations within
a message. *

(U) Although comparatively simple, the IC
machines had deficiencies. It was very difficult to
coax the data camera to place the dots onthe
plates in perfect alignment; that problem contin-
ued throughout the war. The IC machines them-
selves had to be redesigned and reworked during
1943. Perhaps asmany asone half ofall the
machines were inoperable at any one moment.®

() Haste and Confusion

(U) Eastman’s work began in haste, was not
well supervised, and, asa result, was not ade-
quately documented. As a consequence, even the
military services were confused about the names
ofthe machines Eastman proposed or delivered
before 1943.° Some ofthe first lashed-together
models are only vaguely remembered. But the
documents that remain reflect the desperation to
produce machines.

(U) One of those was aversion ofa Bush IC
machine constructed during 1942. When it ran, it
shook the entire laboratory; perhaps that is why it
never appeared in OP-20-G’s machine center.
The device did not use the ideas for tape drives
that Bush and Howard had explored. Rather, two
large message tapes were wound around a large
hydraulically controlled drum. As the drum spun
ata very high speed, the tapes inched back and
offset themselves. When the photoelectric detec-
tor sensed a “hit,” the drum slammed to a stop.”

FOR-SECRETICOMATREL-TOUSA_AUS,.CANGBRAND.NZLIOG.
TOR-SECRETUCOMINTHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-OBR AND NZDT

+3 Some other alternative concepts for
machines came from the groups at Eastman as
they searched for ways to make Howard’s original
suggestions turn into hardware. Trying to help
the navy inits attack against the very stubborn
Japanese additive code systems, the Eastman
engineers drew up initial plans for a combination
oftape readers, electronic circuits to strip the
additives, and aset of whirling disks that were to
hold frequently used code groups. An Edgerton
flash lamp was to help to see ifthe stripped text
groups matched one of the codes on the disks.®

(SSD The disk contraption was not deliv-
ered to the navy, but Eastman’s initial attempt to
turn Bush’s Rapid Document “Selector”
(Information Machine) ideas into auseful mili-
tary machine arrived in Washington before the
end of 1942. Tessie was Eastman’s first great con-
tribution. Tessie began as an attempt to finally
turn the architecture and the fundamental tech-
nologies of the microfilm Selector into a machine
that worked. But Tessie became another prag-
matic compromise. Bush’s ideas were too difficult
to put into practice. They could not be changed
into hardware quickly enough to meet the press-
ing cryptanalytic needs ofthe first years of the
War.

(VU) Tessie Wouldn’t Either

“Sr John Howard made sure that Eastman
knew what he wanted well before the formal con-
tracts with the Bureau of Ships were signed. He
told the men in Rochester that in order to deliver
something of value, in what was hoped was a rea-
sonable time, the new military “Selector” was to
bea special purpose device to perform an impor-
tant but minimally challenging cryptanalytic
function. Its job was to locate four-character code
groups (tetragraphs), not to count them. Finding
and giving the location of groups was a “quick and
dirty” version of IC analysis. “Locations” pointed
tothe possibility that two messages were in
“depth.” ?

~FOP-SEGRETHCOMINTFHREL T0-U GA AUS -GAN—GER-AND-NZLIN4—

-$)-Tessie’s logic and architecture were like
those ofa Selector rather than a Comparator. It
used two 35-millimeter films. One sped past an
optical reading station while the other remained
stationary and acted as an identification mask.
After the fast film made acomplete revolution,
the mask film was stepped one frame. If a desired
tetragraph was located, asignal was emitted.
Then, astrobe circuit signaled a high-power
Edgerton flash to send light through the identifi-
cation portions of the two data films. The light
would register the location of a matched group.
After the run was completed, the new film was to
be quickly developed, then sent tothe analysts
who would trace the groups and begin their
attempt to break the codes.*° There was no abili-
ty to reproduce the code groups, and there was no
ability totally. Those features, Howard knew,
would ask too much ofthe engineers working
under pressure — even of Eastman’s experts.”

(U) The Eastman group put ina great deal of
overtime and was able tosend amachine to
Washington inSeptember 1942. RAM-2, or
Tessie I, was alarge and ungainly thing that was
more than six feet long and almost as high. On
one end was the drive mechanism for the data
microfilms. On the other was a huge round canis-
ter-like component that housed some of the elec-
tronics and the photographic reproduction equip-
ment. On top ofthe canister was a rack of tubes
that could not be squeezed into the machine’s
frame.’*

+} Although ugly, Tessie raised expectations
about the Eastman portion of the RAM program.
A great deal of equipment was ordered to support
Tessie’s work. Fifty- and sixty-foot metal develop-
ing trays, film drying racks, and hundreds of
pounds of chemicals began arriving atthe
cramped “G” headquarters.

-€§} Tessie failed, however. In its first runs it
missed almost all the coincident tetragraphs.
When it did find a “hit,” it refused to produce the
record of it onits internal film. The Edgerton-

Page 65
Page 66

-~FOP-GEGRETHOOMINFFAREL TOUS, AUS; CAN, GBR ait NZOIAT

 

(GQ Tessie

 

 

1943 toreplace many ofthe
circuits and to design anew
flash system. The machine
did begin to do a bit of work.
It was put to use in an attempt
bythe Americans to attack
the Enigma by searching for
tetragraphic repeats.” Tessie
proved ofsome use inthe
next few months although it
continued to misbehave.
Because of continued prob-
lems, it was replaced as soon
as possible and changed into
an even greater analog retro-
gression.”

(U) Tessie’s New Hat

€S)- The navy’s Tessie
was turned into a machine to

 

 

type flash system would not function. Even the
Washington, D.C., water supply refused to coop-
erate in the film development process of the two
“data” films. Chemical imbalances inthe water
were making the tiny dots the Tessie light bank
data camera produced spill over onto each other,
making recognition impossible. That added to the
difficulties of making the camera light bank
behave. Some ofthe problems with the camera
were fixed, but it took longer to find a way to com-
pensate for the chemistry ofthe District’s water
supply.“

FS} One of Tessie’s weaknesses was very
embarrassing for the engineers. It missed “hits”
that were too close together. The special warning
circuit Howard and his men had devised to solve
the problem would not behave.*

—87 Throughout fall 1942 Tessie was too unre-
liable tobe used asan operational machine.
Finally, it was decided to make amajor invest-
ment inits repair. Ittook Larry Steinhardt and
his crew in Washington almost all of January

perform avery simple type of
search for “isomorphs.” Asa_ result, the new
Tessie used only afew ideas from Bush’s 1930s
proposal for anavy “Symmetrical Sequence”
engine. In its new life, it no longer reproduced hit
locations on film. The flash camera was aban-
doned in favor of a punch.”*

—CES//SB- Codebreakers search for anything
that is nonrandom. When they can find patterns
that are obviously not produced by chance alone,
they have at least a beginning ofan attack on an
enemy system. Repeats of phrases or even words
are one ofthe signals that additional analysis
might lead toa successful understanding ofan
enemy’s cipher. One ofthe ways cryptanalysts
located repeated messages, or repeated groups
within messages, was to search for what the army
called “isomorphs” and the navy called “symmet-
ric sequences.” *?

-S/45P Because cipher machines or additive
systems are designed to hide repeats of words,
looking for exact matches in small amounts of
text is usually a waste of time. But what may be

POR-SECRETIGCN AEH REL—POUSA-RUS-GAN- GER AND -NZLPEL
~AOR-SECRETICOMINFHREL-FO-UGAAUS-CAN-GEICAND NELINT

found are patterns. Ifthe word “BATTLE” is
treated asa sequence ofletters and recorded as
“ABCCDE,” an analyst may search for a repeat of
the pattern. The pattern may appear despite the
ability of additives to disguise the underlying
code group.

+F8//SB Isomorphic attacks are expensive
“long-shots.” They were time-consuming because
of the need to recode message texts, and identify-
ing an isomorph only led toa probability that a
depth had been found. But the method had
proven of value tothe American cryptanalysts
since at least the 1930s.

45} When the first Eastman Tessie was out-
classed as a locator of exact match, four-character
groups by its replacement, Icky, OP-20-G decided
tohave Tessie turned into an emergency
Symmetric Sequence Machine. What emerged
from the workshops in early 1944 became known
as Tessie SS. The reborn Tessie was still a six-by-
seven-foot monster, but it had been stripped of
many ofits most sophisticated components.
However, it finally worked, and it saved a great
deal of analyst and, asimportant, recoding
time.”°

(P8778 The new Tessie had a small reel for
the 35mm message film and one for a mask that
contained patterns for the letters A to Z. The pho-
toelectric scanning system’s first task was to iden-
tify the first character of text on the film. Then, it
scanned twenty characters of the message as the
alphabetic mask film sped by. If it found a repeat
ofthe first ofthe twenty characters, it signaled
that the other half ofthe machine should get to
work,

<FS//SB Atthe other end of Tessie SS was
that original huge round canister. But now it con-
tained aroll of plain 7omm paper tape and a roll
ofthe black-red tape that Bush had used on his
paper tape Comparator, not unexposed film.
Instead of the strobe system for reproducing the
location codes for ahit, there was a punching

FOR-SEGRET/COMINTHREL-TO-UG0-AUG-GAN-GBRAND-NZEHMt

mechanism like the ones built for the paper tape
Comparator. When the photocell spotted a
repeated letter, itordered the two tapes to be
punched with tiny holes. When the entire six-
character-per-second run through the message
was completed, the paper tapes were removed,
placed ona viewer, and searched for patterns of
red dots that would indicate where an isomorph
had been found. Tessie SS was much less elegant
than the original, but it functioned successfully.

(U) You Can Use Some of the Technology
Some of the Time, But...

(U) Soon after the original Tessie was deliv-
ered to Washington in fall 1942, it was realized
that itwould never bea success. A radical
redesign would be necessary. Avery different
design was needed ifthe navy was to have a suc-
cessful high-speed microfilm machine.

(U) Eastman assigned a new crew to the task
inearly 1943, but the company was unable to
deliver a machine, Icky, until October 1943. Then
ittook another few months for the men in
Rochester to develop an efficient camera to pro-
duce reliable microfilms for the new Icky.

£487 As they were designing a better camera
system, the Eastman group received some more
depressing news. After its first rounds of tests in
Washington, Icky needed to be reworked. It had
tobe shipped back to Rochester because of the
great amount ofrepair and redesign that was
needed.™ Onits return to Washington, the
machine became an important tool for OP-20-G;
but its success depended onits being, in some
ways, another retrogression.

CFS+4SH First, to allow itto be of immediate
and reliable use, it had been designed to be much
more limited than the Comparator or even
Tessie.** Icky was a film version ofthe IC plate
machine, and it was able to do a primitive analog
IC test, but it just located. It did not make copies
or count. Ithad no reproducing cameras and it

Page 67
Page 68

TFOP-SECRETHECOMINTHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBRU and NZL

had no counter-printer. When enough
light was registered, the machine lit a
signal lamp and stopped. Its operator
used ahand crank toturn the films
back towards the identified coinci-
dence. Atthe point where “enough”
light came through the two films
another signal lamp was lit. Then the
operator used a screen to read the loca-
tion marks printed on the margins of
the films.

(U) From its beginnings as a bench
model, Icky evolved into a chest-high
box as wide as a refrigerator. On its top
was ascreen to view the located mes-
sages. Next to the screen were the reels
and rollers for two 35mm microfilms.
Underneath were the mechanisms that
sped one ofthe films past the other
and the ratchets that stepped the index
film after each pass ofthe fast tape.
Icky’s optical sensing gate was
designed to allow the location of mes-
sage patterns of up to thirty columns of
data. Typically, abright light was
pointed through masks and lenses
which segregated the light into thirty
parallel columns. Iflight penetrated the two
films, itwas directed tothirty small mirrors,
which then sent the light beam to their photocells.

(U) The light management portion ofthe
machine was complex and demanded perfect
alignments. It was the demands of that photocell
system that led toIcky’s having only forty
columns of data per inch of film, a density far less
than Bush had promised the navy.

(U) More significant, Icky was not a digital
machine. Like OP-20-G’s other World War II
microfilm devices, it wandered back to the use of
analog circuits. But it did have a plugboard and
resistor matrix system that allowed the selection
of many different combinations of coincidences.
Polygraphs of long lengths, or patterns of identi-

 

cal subgroups, or single-letter coincidences could
be identified.

(U) Icky had another feature that went
beyond the original Selector. Its coding system
could be changed and its circuits switched so that
it responded to the absence of light rather than its
presence.** The navy’s men found the blackout
method much more efficient when the job was to
search for coincident areas (such as code groups)
rather than single columns of data. With its use,
they could pack more than one letter in a column.
They could register a five-letter (or number) mes-
sage group.

(U) In the blackout system, the two tapes were
reciprocally coded sothat amatched column
would admit nolight. Atwo-of-five character

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREE-TO USA AUS-CAN-CBR AND NZEI—
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA, _AUS- CAN GBR AND NZDINT”

code allowed the use of that reciprocal scheme,
but Icky’s scanner could also accommodate
Bush’s older one-of-twenty-six pattern.”

(U) A Machine for Mrs. Driscoll’s Special
Problem

(U) Eastman designed and built another of
the very few types of microfilm machines used by
OP-20-G during the war. The Hypo assignment
came ina rush, and, like Tessie, it took a year to
complete.* The first Hypo was not in operation
until October 1943.7°

(U) The name, Hypo, came from the
“Hypothetical Machine” proposal drawn up in
response tothe early requests by Mrs. Driscoll’s
Enigma group.””? The project languished for a
time, but ideas were formalized in March 1942.
Machine design began six months later.** Hypo’s
task was to help Driscoll’s small team make a tra-
ditional attack on the German Enigma. It was the
first machine designed especially for the
American work against the “E” machine.

—(FS//58 In early 1942, the United States had
hopes of cracking the Enigma in the same way it
had broken earlier Japanese cipher machines —
through methods that included what some called
“statistical” analysis. Once the entire wheel wiring
of “E” became known, it was hoped that large files
(catalogs) could beconstructed showing how
each combination of enciphering wheels would
“develop” high frequency letters, digraphs, or
very common words. This “catalog” approach was
not considered a “cribbing” attack; it was seen at
the time as a statistical method although counting
was not required. *?

45/88. Constructing catalogs was very labo-
rious. There had to be a card for each wheel com-
bination and order, and for each position ofthe
wheels. Such catalogs ran to hundreds of thou-
sands of cards. Some filled an entire wall with file
drawers. When put into book form, the heavy val-
umes demanded along set of shelves.

FOP-GECRETHCOMINTHREL-TC-USA AUS, CAN-GBR- ANE NZL

¢T8/78B Searching through all the entries to
find those indicating which wheel settings might
have produced the enciphered text was also very
labor intensive.°° That was why cryptanalysts
around the world turned tothe use of overlay
sheets. They allowed a speedier and less demand-
ing way of identifying the possible settings of the
enciphering machines. But they were limited
and everyone wanted a faster method.

€P87785 Investing in the construction of cat-
alogs seemed very wise in1942 because the
United States did not have Bombes or the capa-
bility to continuously find the long and trustwor-
thy cribs that made the British Bombes so power-
ful. The Americans did not even have the com-
mand ofthe techniques that had allowed Alan
Turing to apply his indicator- (not crib-) based
Banburismus IC-like system to “E” since the late
1930s.”

GS/48Hh The Americans knew that Hypo
would not be a cure-all machine, but they had lit-
tle else torely upon. The enormous amount of
labor required to prepare Hypo’s “database,” the
catalog, seemed worthwhile. Turning the catalog
into aform that could beused bya high-speed
machine meant creating a separate roll of film for
each wheel combination. One was needed for
each combination of the Enigma’s slow and medi-
um wheels and its reflector. Each frame on a film
recorded the output of high frequency letters for a
wheel position. Aminimum set ofthe master
films was fifty-six, each with over 17,000
frames.*

3/485 The preparation of the message film
involved as much cryptanalytic persistence as did
creating the “catalog” films. Inone ofthe most
common uses of Hypo, ciphertext was partially
deciphered by pulling out the influence of the pre-
sumed stecker and fast wheel.?4 Then, the new
text was put through acrude Letterwriter tape
machine that recorded the text astiny dots on
microfilm. After that, an analyst had to wait the
many minutes while the film was developed,

Page 69
“TOP SECRETICOMININREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR at NZLIXT

dried, and checked for possible defects.
Producing the message film grew so burdensome
that IBM and Eastman were ordered to cooperate
to build a very expensive but labor saving card-to-
film camera system for Hypo.®®

(U) The Americans were so desperate for their
own solution to the Enigma problem in 1942 that
they did not want to admit to the limitations of
the Hypo method. Hypo was not powerful. A
Hypo run needed prior knowledge of the stecker,
reflector, and wheel order used for an “E” mes-
sage. With that information it could point out a
“likely” starting position (window setting) for the
Enigma wheels.*° That was all it could do, and
that was why only two Hypos were built by
Eastman during the war.*’ Although OP-20-G’s
leaders might have envisioned rooms full of
Hypos, each running a catalog film against a mes-
sage, they soon came totreat the Eastman
machine as only an adjunct to the Bombes.**

(U) Hypo looked and behaved much like Icky.
It used two 35mm films. It was based on dot cod-

 

 

ing and the light bank data entry system.*? The
Hypo camera (for dot registration) was an
improvement over Icky’s, however. Data cards or
tapes signaled which one of the lights in each col-
umn would be lit, and the tiny dots were record-
ed on the films with great precision.

(U) The men working on Hypo also con-
quered some of the problems of the film stepping
mechanisms. That allowed amore precise and
speedy comparison of the films. When the catalog
and message films were placed onthe machine,
one was held stationary while the other flashed by
it. Asin Tessie and Icky, when the second film
completed a revolution, the first was stepped one
increment. That took less than five seconds.

(U) The “statistical” test in Hypo was a
desired level of coincidence between text and
master film spots. As in Tessie, Hypo’s photocells
monitored azone rather than an individual col-
umn. The likely enciphering-wheel positions
were identified simply by enough light reaching a
photocell. When the machine stopped, its opera-
tor wrote down the location of the hit.
| (U) Hypo was ananalog
machine designed to locate. It was
not coaxed to tally until the end of
the war. Even then, itremained a
very simple device. Despite that,
Hypo proved asuseful as Tessie
did, though neither machine solved
any systems byitself. Copies of
Hypo were supplied tothe army’s
| cryptanalysts, and asecond and
more complex version was con-
structed for OP-20-G later inthe
war. By early 1945, Hypo was also
being used against Japanese sys-
tems, after ithad undergone some
significant modifications. *°

 
—TOR-SECRETICOMNTIREL-TO-UGA-AUE-GAN-GER-AND NEE

(U) A Paper War, Perhaps

(U) Hypo did not seem a winner in 1943, how-
ever. The delays in delivering Icky and Hypo had
made Meader and Wenger fearful that Eastman
would be unable to produce any device except the
crude analog and plate IC Machine. In the critical
first two years ofthe war, they also feared that
IBM would not deliver its promised data conver-
sion machines. In addition, there were signs that
the next model ofthe Bush Comparator was in
serious trouble. At the beginning of the war, OP-
20-G was hedging all its technological bets.
Although Howard had advised against a paper
tape machine, the navy ordered him to stop his
exploration of microfilm and draw up the essen-
tials of an upgraded paper tape Bush Comparator.
Howard helped draft a sketch of a slightly revised
version of the old Comparator and sent it to the
bureau’s contractors, NCR and Gray Electric.*
NCR and Gray set out with a great deal of enthu-
siasm, and the navy looked forward to a third ver-
sion of the Comparator in a few months.

(U) Using the older 70-millimeter paper tape,
but with room for thirty-two rather than twenty-
six characters, the new Comparator tallied and it
employed parallelism. It was able to handle and
record up to five pattern tests at once. Its circuits
and plugboards were more complex than the ear-
lier model, and it was given animportant new
capability: it could locate. One tape could be held
stationary while the other sped past it. The sta-
tionary tape then moved one increment for
another pass of the second tape, stopping when a
match was sensed.

(U) Four copies ofthe new paper tape
Comparators were constructed between 1943 and
1945.7” They seemed so promising when they
were first designed that Britain asked for two.
Later, its codebreakers decided against the
machines, and the two were sent tothe army’s
men at Arlington Hall.

(U) The World War II paper tape Comparator
proved an essential tool for the jobs that needed
tallying, but, unfortunately, the new machines
could not be convinced to run appreciably faster
than the 1938 Comparator. The 1943-1945 mod-
els continued tohave arelatively slow speed,
eighty-five characters a second.

(U) One irksome feature of the Comparators
was corrected by the end of the war. Like the orig-
inal Bush Comparator, the 1943 device printed
every result, appreciably slowing its performance.
To speed it, an electronic circuit was added that
allowed printing only when a highly improbable
level of coincidence was computed. **

(U) The task of making areliable punch was
probably turned over toa Bass River,
Massachusetts, firm. But even an expert private
manufacturer could not overcome the punch’s
difficulties. The Oano Company had a tough time
with the design and soon separated itself from the
Comparator project.*

(U) By late 1942, the Comparator seemed des-
tined to fail again. There was too much for
Meader and Howard to keep under control.

(U) The Comparator Dies, Again

(U) John Howard spent the first months of
1942 traveling from place to place with Ralph
Meader trying to force progress on the Eastman
and NCR-Gray machines. By mid-1942 Meader
and Wenger sensed that something was wrong
with the Gray-NCR-MIT effort. When all the
components were finally delivered to
Washington, they did not fit together. The situa-
tion was sobad that the Comparator was
returned to New York where the Gray and navy
engineers redid most of its parts.

(U) When the Comparator was finally sent
back to Washington, the navy engineers had to
spend agreat deal more oftheir valuable time

Page 71
Page 72

 

FEP-GEGRETICOMINTIREL-F6-U Gk -AUS-GAN-GBR-and-NBLE

reworking the comparing and counter-printer
units. That further delayed putting it to use.‘

(U) The new Comparator did not go into
operation until November 1943.47

(U) By then, the relations between Gray and
OP-20-G had become quite tense. What the navy
interpreted as disorganization in New York had
much to do with its alienation.

(U) One explanation of why only four copies
of the new Comparator were built is the difficulty
“G” had controlling Gray’s work. The lack of con-
trol became quite evident in mid-1944 when Gray
Manufacturing took out a full-page advertise-
ment ina widely read electronics journal. It
showed the world what kind oftasks Gray had
been doing for the government that had earned it
an Army-Navy E award. The bottom third of the
advertisement caused an emotional outburst in
Washington. The last two items onthe page
stated: ”

(1) Optical work including the design and con-
struction of various units in the projection field
including photographic technique, motion pic-
ture, and optical systems involving condensers,
prisms, and associated reflector equipment...
cormmunication equipment, electrical counting
and calculating devices, including communica-
tions devices for producing or operating from
perforated, inked, and oiled tapes of various

kinds,

(U) The advertisement infuriated the crew at
OP-20-G. On top ofall the manufacturing prob-
lems, Gray had endangered the security of “G's”
RAM program. Larry Steinhardt could not con-
tain himself when he read the advertisement. He
tore it out of the journal and immediately sent it
to Howard Engstrom with a message he wrote on
it that said, “Note below an excellent description
of the 7omm junkpile this outfit built. Please pass
to Meader.” Although the way the contractors had
organized their work had much todo with the

Comparator’s problems, the underlying cause of
all ofthe difficulties was stubborn technologies.
They made itimpossible for the nation’s best
engineers to fulfill Bush’s promises.

(U) The machines built between late 1943 and
the end of the war had to be retreats from Bush’s
visions. The Copperheads, for example, had to be
compromises between anengineer’s pride and
cryptanalytic needs. Other machines, such as
Bulldozer and Duenna, were advances on the
state of the electronic art, but they were based on
ideas and techniques that were very different
from those Bush had championed.

(U) Almost Another Digital Machine

(U) The other major attempt bythe navy’s
team to fulfill Bush’s promises was the
Copperhead series. Several _ different
Copperheads were designed, and five copies of
one ofthe series were built under Lawrence
Steinhardt’s direction at National Cash Register
and at “M’s” Washington engineering laboratory.
Construction began in late 1943. Unfortunately,
all ofthe more ambitious plans for the
Copperheads had to be put aside because of tech-
nical problems and cryptologic emergencies.
Only the copies of the rather simple Copperhead
I were built.

(U) In 1943 the Atlantic crisis eased some-
what, giving “M” a bit of time to turn to Japanese
problems. Lawrence Steinhardt was assigned the
job of designing Rapid Machines to attack addi-
tive systems. Additive systems were codes with
random numbers added or subtracted from the
underlying numeric codes. Among many others,
the major Japanese naval codes used additives.
The fleet operational code, JN25, was of very spe-
cial importance to American intelligence. But it
had proven to be a very difficult adversary, espe-
cially because the Japanese frequently changed
the long list of additives used to superencipher its
messages.

“TOP-SPCRETHCOMINTHREE-TO-USA-RUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLHN
“TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS--GAN-GBR-AND-NZEI-

=F

(U) Discovering those addi-
tives was atedious process. “G”
had tocall onmany different
methods of attack. IBM equip-
ment had been modified to speed
the identification of the superen-
cipherments, but the process
remained very slow and seemed in
need of Rapid Machines. In 1943
it was decided to start an additive
RAM program. Following the new
habit of using the names of snakes
for Japanese problems, the proj-
ect was called Copperhead.

NOS SO AE ORSON ITS MOO M

aaeeenee

reanow"

(U) Still excited about optical-
electronics, Steinhardt prepared
the outlines for at least five differ-
ent devices for the Copperhead
problems. In his plans, the more
complex models were to be able to
add and subtract and to test statis-
tical weights at electronic speeds.

 

 

—FS}/S5B Copperhead II, for
example, was designed to be able

to add clusters of additives to message text, then
compare the results against along list of known
high-frequency code groups.

EE

£8-Copperhead V was a truly grand vision. If
it had been built, it would have been twenty feet
square. It would have had to have been that big to
beable tomatch strings ofadditives against
cipher text, then perform a true statistical test for
nonrandom letter frequencies.*” That called for
sophisticated electronics and very high-speed
input. The complex job assigned to “V” seemed to
call for microfilm for input and perhaps for a vast
memory. But Steinhardt was aware ofthe prob-
lems atEastman, and atthe onset ofthe
Copperhead project he decided that the older
punch tape approach would be best.

(U) More than a year was spent searching for
anew tape and designing a revolutionary punch.

TOP SECRETHCOMINTIREC TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZOTAT-

a

(U) Copperhead

7D SE Se ee

 

    

Rg SS ee

 

a

After testing many materials, including alu-
minum foil, a 70mm opaque polystyrene tape was
selected. It had the stability needed for very high-
speed transport past the scanning station and did
not distort when there were humidity changes. Of
great importance, itcould accommodate a data

density about twice that ofthe Comparator’s
paper tapes.

(U) The Copperhead punch was a major engi-
neering feat. Its main cabinet was over six feet tall
and was wider than a phone booth. It was packed
with delicate mechanical and electronic parts that
perfectly aligned two tapes and then punched a
reciprocal code. Each column onthe tape had
room for twenty-five tiny dots for message char-
acters and several others for identification of the
message. The punch was designed around the
blackout system. Learning from earlier microfilm
explorations that the absence of light was easier

Page 73
Page 74

to monitor than its presence, one tape was
punched to be the complement of the two-of-five
code on the other. The designers were so pleased
with the Copperhead’s punch, they built modified
versions ofit for the older Gray-NCR
Comparators.

(U) Copperhead I used two sets of sophisticat-
ed motor-driven reels. Ithad asensor system to
manage the end-of-tape condition and the
mechanical components needed to automatically
rewind and step the tapes. Also, the machine was
a landmark in optical sensing. It was built to scan
one hundred message columns at a time!

(U) As with Icky, the Copperhead team had to
take some significant backward steps to produce
amachine to meet the war crises. Only one ver-
sion ofthe Copperheads was built, and it was
unable tocount; itsimply located message
groups. Asmany asfive ofthe Copperhead I
machines were constructed and in operation by
the opening of 1945. But they were very limited
punched tape versions ofthe IC Machine and
Icky.

(U) The Old Technologies Are the Best
Technologies, for a Time

(U) Inthe spring of 1942, the Copperheads
were not yet well-formed ideas, and all other
Rapid Machines were in trouble. Even the refur-
bished 1938 Comparator, the only working Rapid
machine, was not proving its worth. Lawrence
Steinhardt had to strip it of many ofits original
functions to make it reliable enough for use in
mid-1942.

4S} By October, Steinhardt had built a crude
prototype and had drawn the outlines for a much
more sophisticated machine to identify Japanese
code groups based on frequency criteria.

+6} For the emergency machine, 700 of the
most frequent groups were stored on film in
descending order of frequency. The meaning of

the group and its known relative frequency were
listed next to the group’s number and language
equivalent. The “selector” was a simple relay store
with “pin” settings indicating the frequency of the
various code groups inthe message being ana-
lyzed. When the message group and its frequency
matched the composition of a group on the mem-
ory film, the film’s entry was recorded by a fast-
flash system. After the run, the new film was
developed and sent toan analyst who used the
information to help decrypt the message.™

~<48//Sb-After the first lash-up came a series
of increasingly complex “Full Selectors.” By the
end of 1942, the first model had been modified
through the addition of more sophisticated relay
boxes; and bythat time there were plans for a
much larger and powerful device, Mercury.

€F5//58 Although the hopes for a huge elec-
tronic version were defeated, Mercury became a
room full of relay racks that performed a sophis-
ticated “weighted dictionary look-up” test to iden-
tify code groups.” Unfortunately for the navy,
Mercury was not working until the summer of

1945.
(U) Meanwhile, the Tabulator’s Revenge

(U) While Wenger worried about the absence
of functioning Rapid Machines, those who had
advocated the development of older technologies
seemed to be vindicated. The old timers were in
charge oftabulator development, and in 1942
they were the ones delivering cryptanalytic
results.5*

(U) IBM sent all the tabulators and sorters
and collators OP-20-G could make room for, and
the company began to create a host of very pow-
erful additions for its machines. After “G” moved
to its new quarters at an elegant girls’ school on
Nebraska Avenue and had adequate space, OP-
20-G became one ofthe world’s largest users of
TBM equipment. “G’s” IBM machines were count-

TOP SECRETICOMINFHREL-TO-USA- AUS; CAN, GBR AND NZUIXT
“TOP-SPCRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-USAAUE-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX4

edin the hundreds, and they used millions of
punch cards a week.**

(U) Acquiring standard IBM machines was
relatively easy. Alone among almost all business
machine manufacturers, IBM had been permitted
tocontinue manufacturing its products during
the war. Its “tabs” remained stock items, and OP-
20-G already had high priority status.

(U) But gaining IBM’s commitment to contin-
ue to alter its machines (or to allow OP-20-G to
do so) proved more difficult. Joseph Wenger had
to make a personal visit to Tom Watson to con-
vince him togrant OP-20-G’s requests special
attention. Bythe end ofthe war, IBM and the
armed services’ engineers, many of whom were
drafted from IBM and were sent directly to
Washington, had created modifications that
allowed the electromechanical machines to per-
form all the cryptanalytic functions. Because of
those modifications, IBM’s equipment remained
the foundation of OP-20-G’s operations through-
out the war.

(U) With the outbreak of war, the tabulator
group at “G” was able to expand and to convince
IBM to produce specialized equipment. IBM and
the navy began acooperative effort that lasted
throughout the war. Anumber of IBM men
went to Washington, and ahost of new attach-
ments were developed. Some allowed more effi-
cient additive stripping. New devices provided
more effective multiple key sorting and the offset
and comparison of messages for IC analysis. The
location of code words was made faster by other
additions to the tabulators, sorters, and punches.

(U) Although IBM played an important role in
OP-20-G’s war, it was not asked to take a signifi-
cant part inthe Rapid Machine program.®° One
reason for not calling on IBM was that OP-20-G
was already asking a great deal of the company.
In 1942 the requests by the tab group at “G” for
electromechanical and relay devices were enough
to keep the company’s best men busy. The OP-

TOR-SECRETICOMINA Ril —FO-US A AUS SAN CERNE NAH —

20-G/Yard crew did not demand the creation of
anall-purpose tabulator ora general-purpose
relay computer, but they asked for some chal-
lenging engineering advances. The requests indi-
cate the old-timers had long had their own alter-
natives to Bush’s mid-1930s Rapid Machine pro-
posals.

(U) As well asthe special electromechanical
attachments for OP-20-G’s tabulators, IBM creat-
edambitious relay additions. The new IBM
devices were better able to identify and tally par-
ticular code groups and to search for repetitions
of character patterns. Among the more ambitious
proposals for IBM equipment were the Navy
Change (NC) machines.

(U) The NC machines were more than stan-
dard tabs with afew additions hung on them.
Some ofthe thirteen types of Navy Change
machines came close to being special relay com-
puters. Others had special high-speed electro-
mechanical accumulators and some had electron-
ic tubes. *”

(U) IBM’s Most Special Contribution

(U) During 1941 and early 1942, before
Engstrom’s group gained real power over
machine development, and asthe Eastman and
Gray-NCR projects were faltering, IBM and the
men at“G” created another innovative system,
the Letterwriters. Those devices brought OP-20-
G’s data handling into the modern era because
they linked teletype, tape, card, and film media.
The Letterwriter system tied special electric type-
writers to automatic tape and card punches and
eventually to film processing machines.

(U) Before the war the radio intercept person-
nel wrote out the messages they heard on forms,
then forwarded them by mail or keyed them as
telegrams. Because OP-20-G had just begun to
develop teletype and radio networks, it took

Page 75
Page 76

TOP'SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AMT NZLIXT—

weeks tosend all but the most vital messages
from the Pacific.*

(U) There are somewhat conflicting stories
about the origins ofthe Letterwriter (CXCO)
equipment, perhaps because its prehistory was
linked toso many different groups within the
navy. The timing is not entirely clear, but some-
time in late 1940 Hooper’s previous connections
tothe man who had sold his advanced electric
typewriter business to IBM led to some interest in
perhaps modifying his machines toturn them
into data processing devices.

(U) The interest was turned into action in
early 1942 when a young IBM engineer entered
the navy and was assigned to OP-20-G. John
Skinner had worked on a special typewriter-tele-
type project at IBM. When he had enough experi-
ence to appreciate “G’s” data processing prob-
lems, he contacted his ex-boss and arranged to
have some equipment shipped to Washington. °°
After IBM engineers arrived with the devices and
demonstrated their potential, there was an imme-
diate request that IBM launch a major project.

Within less than ayear, the first production
Letterwriter devices were delivered to the crypt-
analysts.

(U) The timely appearance ofthe first
machines was a result of IBM’s earlier commer-
cial efforts at its Electromatic division. The sys-
tem centered ona special electric typewriter, a
tape punch, and a tape reader. It was hoped they
would eventually allow the creation of machine-
ready data directly from “G’s” new international
telegraph system.

(U) The Letterwriters were not intended to be
analysis machines, but to fill the gap left by the
delayed RAM program. The engineers in
Washington turned the Writers into much more
than data entry devices. By adding simple plug-
boards, the engineers made the machines pro-
duce worksheets for the cryptanalysts and change
one code into another. By 1942 the Letterwriters
were evolving into machines for analysis. First,
the typewriters were modified to allow the print-
ing of more sophisticated worksheets. Plugboxes
were added which allowed complex substitutions

 

 

 

 

 
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TC USA-AUS; CAN GBR AND NEE —

of one character for another. This helped deter-
mine the settings ofthe letter-changing plug-
boards on encryption machines. In addition to
being useful for the analysis of steckering, the
modified Letterwriters helped tostrip cipher
wheel patterns from messages.

(U) Simple changes made the Letterwriter
equipment useful for another very important but
time-consuming task, the analysis of wheel set-
tings. When an analyst thought he had found the
correct combinations onan enemy system, he
would set upa copy ofthe encryption machine’s
wheels, lugs, and plugboards and type in parts of
the encrypted message. Hethen examined the
output tosee ifit was sensible. Bycoupling a
Letterwriter tape-reader to one of the American
copies ofa foreign cipher machine, an analyst
would not have torepeatedly enter a message
through the machine’s keyboard.

(U) In the Absence of Rapid Machines

(U) The delays inthe delivery ofthe Rapid
Machines led to another use for the Letterwriters.
The Yard’s men decided to build more far-reach-
ing extensions of them. The first of their 1942 cre-
ations was afrequency counter. Aptly titled The
Simple Frequency Counter, it was among the first
of the new machines to
be delivered toOP-20- jj
G. The Simple Counter '
and its descendants
had apower Bush’s
machines did not pos-
sess: they were able to
recognize and record
individual letters. The
recognition, counting,
and recording of partic-
ular letters and poly-
graphs demanded too
many complex elec-

        

4

 

(Ca ied 2 Seb at a ot Ct

tronic circuits and parts for computer technology
of the early 1940s.

(U) The Counter saved preparing IBM card
decks and the many steps involved in repeated
sorting. Itwas such aneffective design that in
1943 agrand extension of the Counter was con-
structed at NCR. The NCR machine, Mike, tallied
digraphs. Despite the low speed of such devices as
Mike, the inability to deliver any Rapid Machines
led the Yard’s men to create yet another type of
relay-electromechanical analyzer. They designed
amachine, Mathew,” to perform additive strip-
ping. Like the Counter, the Mathews proved reli-
able and were used throughout the war. Mathew
was so rugged that it was applied to more than
traditional stripping.®? It was used on such jobs
as removing the influence of a cipher wheel from
anencrypted message. Over the years, the many
Mathews (at least four were constructed) proved
useful against a majority ofthe encryption sys-
tems attacked by OP-20-G. Mathew was not a
general-purpose machine, however, and its tech-
nology dated from the 1920s. Its processing
power was limited by the speed of its tape readers
and its typewriter. But itwas able to perform
faster than the tabulators and to fulfill functions
too complex for the electronic Rapid Machines of
the era.

Ache LE we BARRE deen

Se) Mathew

1
i
|
4
j

|

|

Page 77
Page 78

 

TOP'SECRETHCONINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-GAN-GBR-and-NzLiK4—

(U) Notes

1>¢8). Almost all the documentation on the first
year ofthe Eastman work and its first machines has
been lost. For an insight into the problems of rushing
into development and lack of coordination among the
Eastman teams and the navy, see Rowley’s comments
about his mid-1943 tour of the Eastman projects, (S)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Inspection of RAM Under
Construction at NY and Rochester,” 31 May 1943.

2.(U) The estimate of when the IC machine was
ready is based on very circumstantial evidence. But it
is clear that it was in use well before any other Rapid
device, including the American Bombe. NSA RAM
File, Report of R. I. Meader, Captain USNR, toJ. H.
Wenger, Captain, USN, “iq Days Training Duty,
Report of,” January 21, 1049, and Communications
Intelligence Technical Paper la, “Technical Report:
The Index of Coincidence Machine” March 1945.

3. (U) Typically, there were other precursors of the
IC machine, including patented devices intended for
business applications. See, for example, H. Soper, U.S.
Patent 1,351,692, August 31, 1920.

4.(U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to OP-20-A,
“Meeting with Prof. Howard,” November 5, 1941, and
Communications Intelligence Technical Paper 1-a,
“Technical Report: The Index of Coincidence
Machine” March 1945. (TS7/S4_The first of the plate
iC machines was delivered in August 1942. But it
needed some fine-tuning and then had to be used ina
controlled area rather than, as planned, atthe crypt-
analysts’ desks. The device was redone several times
before the end of the war, and the army group at SIS
used several copies. Eventually, it adapted to the use of
film aswell as plates. (6\.NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Herbert W. Worden, “EDP Machine History.”
TrSSD. CCH Series XII Z,LeRoy H. Wheatley,
“Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May 1953, and
various years. TTSSILCCH Series XII Z, copies of
various MAC Outlines, circa 1953. (TS//SD) CCH
Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of
Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The
American Attack onthe German Naval Ciphers,”
October 1944 [sic].

5™S.._. AHA ACC 1890, February 27, 1949,
“Accuracy of the L.C. Machine.” AHA ACC 1890, “New

LC. Equipment and Alterations Made on Old
Equipment.” AHA ACC 1890, August 2, 1943,
“Electronic Use of I. C. Projectors.” AHA ACC 1890, D-
GM-5 toGM-5 “Changes Made onI.C. Reader and
Camera.”

6.48458 Onthe confusion over the first of
Eastman’s film machines, Tessie, S409, Brief
Descriptions of RAM Equipment, Navy Dept,
Washington, D.C., 1947, and Leroy Wheatley, Brief
Descriptions of Analytic Machines, NSA 34, 1954.
AHA ACC 1890, GM-2 toG-50, “Tetra Projector #2
(RAM-5): Name for.” AHA ACC 1890, February 27,
1943, “Accuracy of the I. C. Machine.”

7.44} NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA OH 16-85, Oral
History Interview with Capt. John A.Skinner, 25
September 1985, 24.

8.63 NSA CCH Series XII Z,J. A. Skinner,
“Proposal for Decoding Device,” OP-20-GM, 16
February 1943.

g.(U) Four-character code groups were used in
important German and Japanese systems. Itis not
known if Tessie was originally built for use against
both of them. The Japanese high-level fleet code used
a four-digit code. The very important U-boat short sig-
nal code was used to flash location messages and was
tapped by the Allies for cribs. The short signals were
also used as cribs into the four-wheel Enigma systems.
Tessie was modified later in the war specifically for the
German short signals. RAM File, History of OP-20-G
/NCML/4e, 106.

10.€8) AHA, ACC 1890, OP-20-GM-10 to OP-20-
GN, January 23, 1943, “Ram-2, Improvements on
Performance Of.” AHA, ACC 1890, M-4 toCM-5
March 6,1943, RAM-2, “Changes in Operation of.”
AHA, ACC 24880, CIT Technical Paper 9, Tessie SS,
Vol 1,CNO, Navy Dept, Washington, D.C., May 1945.
AHA ACC 1890, “RAM-2 Operating Procedures.”

11. (U) Near the end of the war, counting circuits
were added to the device, making it a weak version of
amicrofilm Bush Comparator. NSA RAM File, History
of OP-20-G/NCML/4e.

12. FS}-AHA, ACC 24880, CIT Technical Paper 9,
“Tessie SS, Vol I,” CNO, Navy Dept., Washington, D.C.,
May 1945.

—~FOR-GEGREFICOMINFEREE-TO-USA- AUS, CAN GRAND NZOIK1
TOR SECRETHCOMINTHREL—FO-UGAAUS-CAN OBR AND NZDINT

13. S$} AHA, ACC 1890, Special Applications
Section, Bureau of Ships, toOP-20-GM, August 11,
1943, “Equipment Developed by EK Co.”

14. 45} AHA Acc 1890, “Report on Enigma Test
Run on RAM-2, January 7-8, 1943.” AHA ACC 1890,
OP-20-GM-10 toOP-20-GM, January 23, 1943,
“RAM-2, Improvements on Performance of.” AHA
ACC 1890, GM-4 toGM, June 23, 1943, “RAM-2,
Technical Details of recent work on.” AHA ACC 1890,
GM-4 to GM, June 30, 1943, “Ram-2, Comments on
Performance of” and July 20, 1943, “RAM-2 Camera
#4, comments on design of.”

15.-<F5}+NSA AHA ACC 1890, GM-4 toGM, June
23, 1943, “RAM-2 Technical Details of recent work

”

on.

16. #5} NSA AHA ACC 1890, GM-10 toGM,
January 23, 1943, “RAM-2, Improvements on
Performance of.” AHA ACC 1890, GM-4 to GM, “24-
hour trial run in E traffic using RAM-2.”

17. (U) Letters from Joseph Eachus circa 1988.
Near the very end ofthe war, counting circuits were
added tothe device, making ita weak version ofa
microfilm Bush Comparator. But until then it did not
even record the place where a “hit” occurred. NSA
RAM File, History of OP-20-G/NCML/4e.

18. (SL485 NSA RAM File, Report of R. I. Meader,
Captain USNR toJ. N.Wenger, Captain, USN, “14
Days Training Duty, Report of,” January 21, 1949. On
Tessie’s rebirth asthe Symmetric Sequence Machine
in 1944, 48} NSA CCH Series XII Z,RAM list and
Conference at Dayton, 11 April 1945, 2S} NSA AHA
ACC 24880, CIT Technical Paper 9, “Tessie SS, Vol I,”
CNO Navy Dept. Washington, D.C., May 1945. AHA
ACC 1890, GM-2 to G-50, May 25, 1944, “Tessie: More
Complete Conversion to symmetrical sequence work.”

19. <F8+45F) Onthe meaning ofthe terms, NSA
CCH Collection, “Army-Navy, Descriptive Dictionary
of Cryptologic Terms,” Headquarters, Army Security
Agency, February 1947.

20.68) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Brief Description
of RAM Equipment,” Navy Dept. Washington, D.C.,
October 1947, 37.

21. <8 NSA CCH Series XII Z,A. W. Tyler,
“Tetragraph Machine II,” (ICKY) 21 February 1944.

22. €PS778H NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. (NSA CCH

TOP SECRETHEOMIVTIREL-FO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLUX 1.

Series XII Z, “ICKY,” circa 1944. TTS#48D. NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “Hypo I - Hypo Il,” March 1954.

23. (U) NSA RAM File, “M.A.C. Outlines #17,
70mm Comparator,” April 1947. The German inven-
tor, Goldberg, had chosen the blackout methods.
Emanuel Goldberg, U.S. Patent 1,838,389, Statistical
Machine, December 29, 1931, Filed April 5, 1928.

24. (U) NSA RAM File, Communications
Intelligence Paper 6, ICKY, Washington, D.C. April,
1945.

25.-448+/5H Hypo was delivered toOP-20-G in
October 1943, just as the bombes became operational.
(FS4+/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Hypo I- Hypo II,”
March 1954.

26. GS46H NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Hypo I-
Hypo III,” March 1954.

27. (U) NSA RAM File, “List of Equipment for
Enigma Problems.” Note that high-level policy had led
the navy to place little emphasis on Hypo during 1941.
Howard was told that Mrs. Driscoll’s problem was “not
that important” and toplace emphasis on other
machines. NSA RAM File, November 14, 1941, Bureau
of Ships toHoward, “Driscoll’s problem not that
important.”

28. €F54/S2- NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic], 51.

20.-€F54465 Hypo’s initial outlines contained an
explanation of how it might be constructed so as to be
used asa true crib device. 4S4/SH NSA CCH Series
XII Z, CNO CIT Technical Paper TS-10/E-3, “Enigma
Series: Vol. #, Statistical Studies,” January 1946.

30. GS45R NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic], 117.

31. (U) Britain also had statistical methods, such
as Banburismus, which brought forth some ideas
about a film machine in England, perhaps as early as
1939. England may have built film devices that
equaled or exceeded those built inthe United States
during the war. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 178,
233.

Page 79
Page 80

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA-AUS-CAN GBC ard NEL

32-68) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.” On the state of
American knowledge of Enigma methods at the out-
break ofthe war, ¢P94/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z,
(812008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American
Attack onthe German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944.
[sic].

33. &S45 NSA CCH Series XH Z,CNO CIT
Technical Paper TS-10/E-3, “Enigma Series:
Statistical Studies,” January 1946, E3-12.

34. (FSA48 Two different uses of Hypo are
described inthe existing literature. For the one
described here, see 4F5,44SBH NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Hypo I- Hypo Ii,” March 1954, and for the other
more crib-like description see, TTS44SQ. NSA CCH
Series XII Z,CNO CIT Technical Paper TS-10/E-3,
“Enigma Series: Statistical Studies,” January 1946.

35. GS-89 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Hypo I-
Hypo Hi,” March 1954.

36. (4 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Descriptions of
NSA Early SPDs and Computers, ascompiled from
various NSA sources. @S489 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
LeRoy H. Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,”
30 May 1953, and various years. (TS#4SQ NSA CCH
Series XII Z, copies ofvarious MAC Outlines, circa
1953-

37. (9 However, Lawrence Steinhardt completed
another in 1946 and afourth inthe early 1950s. (C)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, Descriptions of NSA Early
SPDs and Computers, ascompiled from various NSA
sources.

38. &} Hypo was modified for use against the
Japanese 157 Jade machine. SS).NSA CCH Series XII
Z, H. H.Campaigne “Use of Hypo on the JN-157,” 21
February 1944.

39. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, USNC, CITP TO-33
“Overhaul of Hypo #1,” Washington, D.C., June 1945.
Letters to author from Joseph Eachus. Microfilm and
Hypo.

40. (U) NSA RAM File, W. A. Wright to OP-20-G
February 21, 1944, “Comparison of Army and Navy
Enigma Equipment.” NARA RG457, SRH-200,
“Army-Navy Collaboration 1931-1945,” 216-8. For
later models and use against Japanese systems: NSA
RAM File, June 16, 1947, OP-20-G Research

Committee Meeting; January 5, 1945, “Hypo Stepping
Switch”; “History of OP-20-G /NCML/4e”; and CNO,
U.S. Naval Communications, CITP TO-24 “JN-37
Problem on Hypo,” Washington, D.C., May 1945.

41. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand, Trial Records,
Deposition of Joseph Desch. NARA Suitland, OSRD
Contract Files, OEM-275 November 28,1941, “NCR-
MIT counters.” NSA RAM Files, Joseph Desch to
OSRD, February 12,1943, “Only Navy work at NCR.”

42. (U) The estimates ofthe number of
Comparators built during the war vary from six to as
many as twenty-eight. Four is the correct figure. The
reason for the high estimate was probably that all the
later postwar Comparator-like machines were includ-
ed.

43.8) Office of Naval Research, Patent File on
“Electronic Comparator, Vannevar Bush.” V. Bush,
U.S. Patent, February 17, 1950, “Electronic
Comparator,” 2,873,912. Ofimportance for the post-
war history ofthe Rapid Selector, the Comparators
became the basis for the navy’s patent claims over
optical-electronic devices. 6) On the British and army
comparators, 6) NSA CCH Series XI E, Hagelin, Box
2, Folder, “Comparators..”

44. &) Onthe rare event circuit, (S) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, J. H Howard, “7oOMM Comparator & Rare
Event Circuit,” 27 October 1944.

45. 484485 NSA CCH Series XIE Hagelin,
Box,” Notes on various topics.”

46. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Inspection of RAM
Under Construction at NY and Rochester,” 31 May
1943. (} NSA CCH Series XIE, Hagelin, Box 2,
Folder, “Comparators.”

47. (U) NSA RAM File, Report of R. I. Meader,
Captain USNR toJ. N. Wenger, Captain, USN, “14
Days Training Duty, Report of,” January 21, 1949. NSA
RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications, CITP
TS “Machine Descriptions,” Washington, D.C., circa
1945. “Mike, Comparator.” NCML-CSAW Message
File, April 14, 1944, “Punch being modified at Gray.”
The Americans were not the only ones to have prob-
lems with tape machines. Britain’s attempts to create
similar machines, the Robinsons, faced even greater
difficulties. Asthe new Bush Comparator was going
into operation, Britain was still testing its first two tape

TOR_SECRET/COMINTIREL-TO-USA-AUG-GCAN-CGBR-ANB-NEEHEE-
“-FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-CBRANE-NZEHRT-

systems and would soon turn away from such devices
because coordinating the tapes was too difficult. Allen
W.M. Coombs, “The Making of Colossus” Annals of
the History of Computing 5 (1983): 254. Brian
Randell, “The Colossus,” in N. Metropolis et al. (ed.), A
History of Computing in the Twentieth Century, (New
York, 1980), 47-92.

48. 68 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Gray
Manufacturing Co., “Design Advertisement,” June
1944.

49. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, mes-
sages to and from Dayton and Washington, November
1943 to March 1945. NSA RAM File, “Final Report,
Copperhead II,” Communications Intelligence Paper
24, and Communications Intelligence Paper 41,
“Copperhead I Punch and Copperhead I Scanner.”

50. #9) NSA CCH Series XII Z,RAM list and
Conference at Dayton, 11 April 1945. (S) Steinhardt, L.
H., “Copperhead II (Project M-230) Final Report,” 9
November 1944. SS).NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Use of
RAM on Jap Naval Problems of BII type,” 9 June 1944.

51.48} NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R. Steinhardt,
“Full Selector,” 31 October 1942.

52,83 NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
“Full Selector,” 31 October 1942. TMSY/SD_NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “Office of Computers, List of Computers,”
nd.

53. (F848) The group of practical engineers were
probably the ones who built the rather crude but use-
ful electromechanical Shinn and Ely machines during
1041 and early 1942. (S$) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-
20-G War Diary, OP-20-GS, Machine Processing,
February 1942-January 1045. (FSA482) NSA CCH
Local Archive, “Army-Navy Descriptive Dictionary of
Cryptologic Terms,” Army Security Agency, February
1947. The descriptions of these machines were not
located. IBM aids OP-20-G, 1942.

54. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-340, “Achievements of
the SSA In World War H,” 18. In January 1941 OP-20-
G Washington had 161IBM machines, in 1945, some
200. NARA RG457, SRH-197, “US Navy
Communications Intelligence, Organization, Liaison
and Collaboration 1941-1945.” University of
Pennsylvania, Van Pelt Library Archives, Papers of
John Mauchly, October 11, 1944, “Mauchly notes on
meeting with Kullback of ASA.”

-TOR-SECRET/GCOMIFTAREL -FO-USA AUS, CAN, GER AND NZLIX1

55. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to Radio Sound
Branch, September 5, 1941, January 16, 1942. NSA,
Tabulating Machine File, July 24, 1941 and December
6,1941 toRadio Sound Branch, Design Division,
Bureau of Ships. On frictions with IBM, CNO to BuEng
1-93-24; “Conference With IBM,” May 23, 1934.

56. (U) NSA, Tabulating Machine File, OP-20-G to
BuShips, July 24, 1941.

57-€P3) NSA CCH Series XI E, Hagelin, Box 2, “NC
Machines.” The various types of NC machines were

NC 1: consecutive numbering device

C2: relay adder to mechanize decryption of addi-
tive cipher

NC3: “single eliminator,” which selected duplicate
cards ina deck leaving only unique ones; it used vacu-
um tube circuits and read 300 cards a minute (NC 12
replaced it).

NC4: selective punch whose relay additions
allowed a variety ofsubstitutions tobe punched on
cards

NC5: pattern punch whose abilities included
searching for isomorphs

NC6: column differencer whose amazing accumu-
lator could hold up to 400 items, recognize the largest,
and punch an indicating card. It also matched high fre-
quency text against stripped code

NC: percentage selector whose special relay box
allowed round-robin repeat searches and selected
them ona percentage of coincidence basis

NC8: automatic circuit changer, which allowed
automatic switching of alpha or numeric data among
as many as twenty-five plugboards and the rearrange-
ment columnar data

NCo: only a prototype of this special substitution
punch was built.

NC10 and NCit: typewriter-like near off-the-shelf
devices

NC12: replaced the NC3

NC 13: converted IBM cards toand from micro-
film, ifit worked; the conversion from microfilm to
cards was a true innovation at the time

58. (U) Interview with Fred Parker, and his award-
winning article, “The Unsolved Messages of Pearl
Harbor,” Cryptologia 13 (1991): 295.

Page 81
—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL-FC-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR- and NEE

59. (FSA¢S4) NSA CCH Series XII Z,John A.
Skinner, “The CXCO Story,” NSA Technical Journal,
VXI (Fall 1971), 21-37.

60. (U) IBM would offer similar equipment to
commercial users after the war. For alist of
Letterwriter CXCO equipment available from the
newly named Justo-writer division of IBM in 1947, see
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015, ERA
Materials, “Seminar Meeting, Tuesday, March 11,
1947.”

61. (U) Private Paper on NSA Machinery, 1985.
NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications,
CITP TS Machine Descriptions, Washington, D.C.,
circa 1945. “Letterwriter.” NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S.
Naval Communications, CITP, “Machine
Comparisons,” June 1946.

62. (U) The name was frequently spelled as
Matthew.

63. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval
Communications, CITS Technical Paper TS-48,
“Machine Comparisons,” June 1946.

Page 82 FOP-SEGRETHGCOMINTIREL-TO-UEA-AUE--GAN,-GER-AND-NELI
—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TC USA, AUS, CAN GBR ANE-NZEIt—

Chapter 4

(U) Meeting the Crisis: Ultra and the Bombe

(U) Looking Ahead — Ultra Saves RAM and
OP-20-G Creates a Science Company

(U) The history of OP-20-G’s cryptanalytic
machine program would have been very different
if Britain had had the power to read the German
U-boat messages during 1942. On the chance that
its men could beat the British to a reentry into the
U-boat Enigma, OP-20-G was granted its long-
sought Rapid Machine program and its own fac-
tory and workforce. But the establishment of
what became known asthe Naval Computing
Machine Laboratory came at a price. Because the
American navy had not attended to the Enigma
and because Hooper and Wenger’s pleas for
machine development in the 1930s were not fully
heeded, OP-20-G had to defer its attempts to cre-
ate advanced electronic computers for pure crypt-
analysis. To solve the “E” problem, the machine
group spent most ofits first year and one-half,
and much of the next two years, coaxing electro-
mechanical components into doing things never
before expected of them. The conglomeration of
electrical, mechanical and electronic parts called
Bombes turned Engstrom’s men away from solv-
ing the fundamental problems associated with
Bush’s designs, and away from an exploration of
the possibilities ofa general-purpose electronic
machine.*

(U) The “E” Machine

(U) The Bombe was the example of the need
for a technological retreat to deal with a crypto-
logic emergency. Despite Germany's destruction
during World War Iand the crippling burdens
imposed on it under the peace, it built a strong
codemaking capability during the 1920s and
1930s. At the center was the Enigma encryption

—FOP-SEGRETIGGMINTHREL—FO-UGA-AUE-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLHK4—

ee ant

machine, the workhorse of its military communi-
cations networks.

(U) The Enigma was atypewriter-size device
that could be used inthe field aswell asin an
office. It was electromechanical and used batter-
ies to provide the electric current which passed
through aseries of shifting transposition rotors
(commutators) to yield an extremely long encryp-
tion cycle. Physically, Enigma consisted of a key-
board to enter letters, a cascade of moving wheels
that scrambled their inputs, areversing wheel
that sent the electrical impulses back through the
wheels, a plugboard that further mixed the let-
ters, and aseries of lamps that showed the final
result of the encryption.

(U) The Germans felt safe because they calcu-
lated that even ifthe wiring ofthe code wheels
were known, it would take impossibly long for an
enemy to identify the particular “key” settings of
amessage. Inits early configuration, with just
three of five available code wheels being used and
no plugboard, Enigma had over one million pos-
sible settings. *

(U) When the plugboard was added to the
military versions, the Germans felt even more
confident. The possible combinations jumped
into the range of two hundred million million mil-
lion! That made intellectually blind attacks on the
machine an impossibility. *

(U) One World War II cryptanalyst explained
why there was acritical need for revolutionary
methods, and machines which could reduce the
number of possible “E” settings that had to be
examined, by stating: * “If every man, woman and
child inthe British Isles were given an Enigma
machine, they would have to try 3,000,000 pos-

Page 83
—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA, AUS, CAN OBR AND NZDT

sibilities on each starting position on each wheel
order and would work their whole life to break
one key.”

(U) The Germans constantly changed the “E”
to make it stronger. They enhanced the system by
increasing the number of wheels to choose from.
Bythe end ofthe war, German codemen could
choose from asmany asnine main scrambling
wheels when selecting a setup for their machines.
In1942 the Atlantic U-boat system added a
fourth wheel inside its machines. Later in the war,
the Germans made the machine more robust
when they changed the plugboard and attached
the Uhr box. The Uhr added another level of
complexity by eliminating some of the cryptolog-
ic weaknesses of the plugboards.

     
 

WAN GOWNS oom

wretis-—

STEERER

il aaa

Ss

 

DETR EE TEST RE

StHLUSSEL M

LIGHT SOCKETS

(U) Perhaps most frightening to the Allies was
the “pluggable reflector” which appeared on some
German air force and army networks near the end
of the war. It created more combinations to hunt
through than had the introduction ofa fourth
wheel.®

(U) The Germans were particularly sensitive
to a weakness in all encryption systems, the vul-
nerability of internal indicators. Indicators were
the brief instructions in each transmission that
told a recipient how to set the remaining compo-
nents of his Enigma, the ones not specified ina
network’s instruction books. Unlike the keys
specified for all users ina network, indicators
were selected by operators and changed with each
message. Unfortunately for the Germans, they
found no way to prevent their enemies
from using those indicators to pene-
trate some ofthe “E” networks. The
exploitation of the indicators was one of
the most important ways that Poland’s
cryptanalysts entered the Enigma sys-
tems in the early 1930s.

(U) The Poles were helped by stolen
documents and used many more
approaches than the attack based on
the indicators. °

(VU) Only a Few Were Able and
Willing to Tackle “E”

(U) Poland created what Stanford
Hooper and William Friedman yearned
to have in America: an office devoted to
pure cryptanalysis. Poland’s codebreak-
ing bureau was able to recruit several
bright young mathematicians who, as
early as 1930, began to apply group the-
ory and other advanced mathematical
and statistical techniques to the
German Enigma system. With the help
of stolen documents provided by the

 

 

Page 84

French, the Poles began to understand
and then penetrate the Enigma. They

~FOR-SEGRETIGOMINTHREL-FO-USA, AUS; CAN CBR AND NZEIKT
FOR-SEGREHIGCOMIFFIREL -FO-U6A-AUS-CAN-CBROAND-NZEA

were reading many German systems by the mid-
1930s. Bysupplementing their mathematical
analyses with the weaknesses of some of the oper-
ational uses of the Enigma, such as repeating the
indicators for a message or picking keys in a non-
random way, the Poles were able to avoid using
brute force searches that tested every possible “E”
setting. They even learned how to avoid using
data-heavy statistical analysis. A significant and
fundamental discovery by the Poles was that the
forbidding and seemingly impregnable plugboard
was irrelevant in some cryptologic contexts. The
discovery about the plugboard reduced the num-
ber of tests needed to identify an Enigma’s setup
by millions.

(UC) The Poles Automate Cryptanalysis in
Their Special Way

(U) The Polish group also called upon
automation inthe early 1930s. Much work and
genius went into the invention ofan  electro-
mechanical machine, the Cyclometer, which
automatically generated all the patterns produced
by various Enigma settings. The Cyclometer was
not a statistical machine ora device that could
lead toa modern computer, however. It was an
electromechanical rig that produced acard cata-
log so analysts, in just afew minutes, could go
from the indicators ina message tothe Enigma
setup.

(U) In 1938, to meet a change inthe way the
Enigma’s settings were communicated, the Poles
invented their version ofan electromechanical
automaton, the Bomba.” The Bomba was aset of
linked Enigma machines that tested for the letter
cycles produced bythe setting indicators in
Enigma messages.

tS/One explanation for the use of the strange
name, Bomba, is based on the mechanical crude-
ness of the first Polish machines. To save precious
construction time and parts, when the Bomba
found a hit, a weight on the side ofthe machine

TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREE-T6-UGA-AUE,-GAN-GBR-AND NZL

was dislodged and dropped to the concrete floor
with a very loud “bang.”®

(U) The special-purpose Bomba was based
upon anegative logic and used aspecial “crib”
composed ofthe message indicators. The
Bomba’s goal was to eliminate the wheel orders
and wheel positions that could not have produced
the letter-to-letter cycles in an indicator.

(U) The Poles had constructed six ofthe
Bombes, one for each possible wheel order. That
was adequate when the Enigmas came with only
three encryption wheels to choose from. But just
as the first Bombas were put into operation, the
Poles had to face anincrease inthe number of
Enigma wheels, then an alteration inthe use of
the “E” plugboard. Those changes demanded ten
times the number of Bombas for a timely search.
The Poles were too exhausted to produce so many
additional machines. Their attempt to reenter
Enigma through new statistical and hand meth-
ods was frustrated bya lack of manpower and
time.?

(U) Keeping the Bomba Secret for Too Long

(U) When the invasion of Poland seemed
imminent, and when the Warsaw team could not
sustain its automation efforts, the Poles started to
pass their secrets totheir friends.*° It was not
until late summer 1939, when the Poles had to
have help in producing more of their vital overlay
sheets and Bombas, that Britain and France were
informed of how the Polish men had been able to
read Enigma messages.

GS#/5H The British representatives were
grateful for the information, but they also were
very upset that they had not been told the secrets
when they had met with the Poles in February
1939. Their anger almost led to a break between
the two sets of codebreakers. One high-level
British codeman, not realizing the Poles under-
stood English, vented his frustration by berating
them while in their limousine. Fortunately, the

Page 85
TOP 'SECRETICOMINTTREL TO USK, AUS CAN GBICAND NEL

diplomatic skills of his countrymen calmed the
Poles.™

(U) Despite the affront, the Poles gave the
Englishmen copies ofthe Enigmas they had
reverse-engineered and told them ofthe many
ways toidentify the various German Enigma
radio networks. But on the eve of the invasion of
Poland, the Germans made several more shatter-
ing changes in their Enigma systems, which made
Britain’s task nearly impossible. After France was
overrun, Britain was left with the responsibility
for making anew beginning against the
Enigma.™ To exploit both her own previous work
and the gifts ofthe Poles, Britain expanded its
Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS)
and established the now famous Bletchley Park.

(U) A Fresh Start against “E”

(U) Despite the belief among many British
influentials that the German code and cipher sys-
tems, especially their naval ones, would never be
broken, Britain made a significant commitment
to cryptanalysis. *

(U) Teams of brilliant men and women were
recruited from the universities to work on the var-
ious Axis systems. Alan Turing was only one of
the Bletchley wonders who were recognized
experts in mathematics and logic.“* Under
intense pressure, by 1940 heand others at
GC&CS began to create the many invaluable tech-
niques and electrical devices that eventually gave
birth tothe Ultra Secret. For example, the first
Bletchley version of its Bombe was in operation in
early 1940.The next important configuration,
with the ingenious diagonal board for the critical-
ly needed simultaneous testing of plugboard set-
tings, was running by August. '* That Turing-
Welchman Bombe of 1940 was acousin, but a
very distant one, of the Polish Bomba.

(U) Turing explored many varieties of possi-

ble solutions, hoping to find one that would with-
stand changes in“E” and its usage. Although

Page 86

actively seeking pure methods to attack the
Enigma, Turing eventually had to accept the use
of a dependent and near brute force approach. °

(U) At first he thought he had discovered a
relatively pure method. In 1939 when he went to
the naval section at Bletchley Park, Hut 8, Turing
sought arobust and universal means of attack.
After learning as much as possible about Enigma,
he called on his knowledge of statistics and prob-
ability. He arrived at a method quite like the one
Wenger and Bush had chosen for the
Comparator, the Index of Coincidence. The name
given tohis cluster of statistical methods was
“Banburismus.”

€F8}-Turing focused his statistical powers on
the German naval systems because they had been
the most intransigent. Hethought that if his
“Banburismus” methods proved of worth against
them, they could be generalized toall cipher
machine systems.'? The general logic of
Banburismus was, like the IC, based on the statis-
tical characteristics of language. The goal of both
approaches was also the same: to identify mes-
sages that had been enciphered with the same
“key” or machine setting. Once such a “depth”
had been pinpointed, the machine setting could
be found and the cipher messages turned into
readable text.

€¥8}-More than the logic and goals were simi-
lar. The techniques were essentially the same.
Two messages that were thought to have been
produced by the same key (as suggested by such
evidence asthe same callsigns and indicators),
were placed one above the other. Coincidences
were then counted and evaluated against the
number expected by chance. The counting was
repeated for each ofthe offsets. Turing even
mechanized the process through the use of over-
lay sheets. Holes were punched inthe sheets to
represent the text. When the two sheets were
superimposed, the coincident holes were very
easy to identify. That allowed relatively unskilled
labor to be used to tally the results. The overlap

FOR-SEGRETIGCOMINTIREL-TO-U62-A06,GAN-GBR-AND-NZE—
“TOP SECRETICONINTHREE FC EA-AUS.-CAN,-GBR-ANDNZLUX1

method could also be used to exploit the informa-
tion that could be drawn out of the indicators in
the messages.

(#8) Turing went further with his ideas. He
developed his IC-like approach into an elegant
predictive system. His “bans” were statistical esti-
mates of how likely it would be that two messages
would prove tobe ofvalue inidentifying the
cipher keys. Such estimates allowed the cryptan-
alysts to make rational decisions about allocating
their very precious time. They could concentrate
their skills onthe messages most likely to yield
results.

(FS) Banburismus was Britain’s initial
method of attack onthe German naval Enigma
and continued asits most powerful tool until
1942. Helped by other techniques, such as
“scritching,” ® it was the way Hut 8 identified two
ofthe three wheels used inan Enigma setting.
Once the wheels were specified, the analysts
could attack the other parts of the Enigma “key.”

(FS). ~—s Unfortunately, = while  Turing’s
Banburismus was an advance onthe state of
cryptanalytic art, it was not strong enough to be a
timeless and independent conqueror of Enigma.
Its target of the early 1940s, the naval Enigma,
was too rugged. The success of Banburismus
depended, despite Turing’s hopes, on knowing
the contents ofthe very special “E” instruction
sheets the German Navy used. From 1939 to the
end of 1942, when Banburismus was no longer
employed against the naval systems, the British
had tocapture or, with agreat expenditure of
manpower, reconstruct bigram and other com-
plex tables that were used to superencrypt the
naval “E” indicators. Banburismus went blind
several times when the Germans changed the
tables.

GS//SB As used against the naval systems,
Banburismus was also dependent upon having a
very large number of messages in “depth.” As
many as 300 messages might be needed to allow

—TOR-SEGREHICOMINT REL —TO-USA-AUS CAN. GBRANDNZLIUX4.

the identification of the Enigma wheels.’*? Even
with enough messages, Banburismus needed
more help.

(P8778 Banburismus was elegant, but it was
not self-sufficient. Wheel wiring had to be known,
and “cribs” and much hand testing were required
to identify the plugboard connections and wheel
turnover points. *° A very large investment had to
be made in compiling a catalog of all the possible
enciphernents ofthe German word for “first.” It
was needed to supplement the statistical analysis
with primitive cribbing. That “Eins” catalog
drained the resources of Bletchley Park, but it did
not prove as timesaving as hoped. Moving from
the suspected location ofthe crib word “Eins” to
the catalog entry for its possible setting and then
testing to see if the key had truly been found were
too demanding. ™

€FS}In near desperation, Turing turned toa
full-blown crib approach. He relegated
Banburismus to being an adjunct to his version of
the Bomba. By 1940 he had designed a machine
that was to be a high-speed, automated, and near
universal “catalog.” His device would take any
long crib and test it against all possible wheel set-
tings of an Enigma and do it within minutes.

(U) Given the technology available to him,
this rather crude method seemed the only alter-
native. Thus, while he explored the application of
other statistical methods to the “E” problem, he
sketched out a new Bombe.” It used some of the
ideas of the Polish Bomba, but the British Bombe
and its logic were special.

(U) Turing’s Bombe was an electromechanical
analog of the Enigma.** It was based on identify-
ing logical contradictions as represented by flows
of electricity. Its banks of interconnected high-
speed “E” wheels spun until they found a setting
that might have produced the crib setup on the
machine. Like the Bomba, it needed to search
through all the wheel settings, and it accepted the

Page 87
FOP-SECRETIGOMINTIREL-FOUSA,AUS CAN.GBR.AND N7L/Xi

consequences of relying upon a special-purpose
machine.

(U) Turing’s Bombe needed agreat deal of
prior information about German networks and
their keys. His crib attack was premised on know-
ing the wiring and turnover pattern of each “E”
wheel, and it needed insights into the plugboard
and other settings ofeach Enigma net. Turing
knew his Bombe could have been made as useless
as the Polish machine if the Germans significant-
ly increased the number of letters changed by the
“E’s” plugboard, if they stopped using stereotyped
phrases at the beginning of their messages, or if
they ended the practice of sending “E” messages
on simpler cipher systems. He also knew that his
machines would be expensive and that their con-
struction would perhaps ask too much of Britain’s
manufacturers.

—~€P3Turing faced some stiff opposition when
he requested that a program be funded. Although
he explained that Banburismus would reduce the
number of wheel combinations that had to be
tested from more than 300 to fewer than thirty,
thus calling for only a dozen Bombes, administra-
tors at Bletchley had serious concerns.** They did
not want to waste money and time onthe con-
struction of a machine that had to correctly scan
hundreds of circuits within a fraction of a second.
They knew the dangers intrying to construct a
reliable machine that was to have ten miles of
wire, a million soldered connections, and a clutter
of mechanical parts.

(U) More than the machinery was at risk. To
find the right kind of cribs for the Bombes called
for the creation of a new and large group of ana-
lysts toconstantly mine German intercepts for
new leads.”

(U) Turing made his machine as universal as
possible. Although it followed the logic of point-
ing tothe wheel settings that could not be elimi-
nated, it tested the settings against letter loops
from within relatively long plaintext phrases

Page 88

(cribs) in messages. Relying upon words within
messages rather than indicators guaranteed a
longer life tohis Bombes and promised fewer
false drops.

(U) Abit ofluck made the Bombe even
stronger. Before Turing had finished his design
for a machine to attack the three-wheel Enigmas,
ayoung mathematician appeared at Bletchley
Park whose insight multiplied the Bombe’s abili-
ties. Gordon Welchman’s suggestion for the
“diagonal board” allowed aninstantaneous test
for the influence ofthe plugboard setting and
allowed the effective use of relatively “weak”
cribs, ones without long letter loops.”°

(U) Analog and Parallel May Be Fast, But ...

(U) Although electronics was tempting and
although men like Turing knew that digital pro-
cessing would become the basis for modern com-
puters, alarge number of machines had to be put
in operation in weeks, not years. Britain needed
working machines immediately. Inlate 1939
GC&CS’s managers had to turn to someone who
could produce immediate and sure-fire technical
results. They found the right man: “Doc” Harold
Keen, the head engineer at Britain’s version of
IBM, the British Tabulating Machine Company.
Keen built aprototype ina few weeks and was
able to begin sending some operational Bombes
to GC&CS in a few months. One reason for his fast
work was the use ofstandard, tried-and-true
parts and analog logic.

(U) To match Turing’s logic, Keen designed
new five-inch commutator drums that were hard
rubber and metal contact imitations of a double
Enigma wheel.*” The drums were arranged in
banks of three, each being a double analog of an
Enigma scrambler unit. One wheel in each bank
was run continuously, another moved after a full
revolution of the first, and the last stepped after
the other two had completed their cycles.

FOPR-SEGRETICOMINTIREL—TO-USA-AUS,-CAN,-GER-AND-NELI
FOR-GEGREHICOMIN-HIREL-F0-U60-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZL-

(U) Asthe Bombe’s wheels spun over the
commutator connections, they created instanta-
neous multiple electrical pathways through the
other banks. Then the electrical charges went to
the relays that matched the flows against the crib.
Atthe same time, they surged through the
Welchman diagonal board to test the assump-
tions about the setup of the “E” plugboard.

(U) Inthe first models agreat deal was
expected of the operators. To identify the wheel
positions when a hit was encountered, they had to
touch the relays. Eventually, a small printer was
attached to the machines.

(U) Keen’s engineering task was made more
difficult by the need to test for another type of log-
ical impossibility. To make the test, he had to pass
the output ofthe wheels through the diagonal
board. The diagonal board was atwenty-six by
twenty-six matrix of resistors that instantaneous-
ly sensed inconsistencies such astwo different
input letters being enciphered into the same out-
put letter.

(U) To test all possible wheel combinations
against just one crib for athree-wheel Enigma
called for atleast sixty machines. The Germans
ran dozens of systems, and only hundreds of
Bombes could have provided unaided coverage of
them all. Turing’s method of reducing the num-
ber of wheel combinations that had to be tested
was soon overwhelmed by improvements inthe
German systems and bythe proliferation of
encryption networks.

(U) Unfortunately, BITMC faced too many
shortages of men and materials to keep up the
early pace of production. Keen was able to send
less than amachine amonth toTuring during
1940 and 1941. In early 1942, the record was not
much better. Bletchley had only sixteen bombes
and production had slowed.?* To produce two of
the Bombes a month stretched Britain’s produc-
tive capacity. Bletchley Park was unable to build
up enough ofan inventory ofthem to seriously

TOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBROANB NZD

challenge any Enigma system until the end of
1942 and in the first days of 1943 GC&CS still had
fewer than fifty machines.

(U) But itwas not until mid-1942 that
Britain’s leaders decided tocommit massive
resources to the Bombe program. Only when they
seemed essential to victory in Africa and tothe
safety ofthe Middle Eastern oil supplies was
“Doc” Keen given new factories and a large work-
force. That allowed BTMC to produce some 200
three-wheel Bombes by the end of the war.”?

(U) Although Britain did not have much of an
Ultra Secret in the critical months of 1940-41, she
wanted to keep what she had to herself. Britain’s
codebreakers feared revealing their methods,
even tothe Americans, whose military aid had
become essential to their nation’s survival.2° They
had anot unwarranted fear that sharing with
America would lead to breaches of security and
the demise of Ultra.*

(U) The World War II relationship between
the British and American cryptanalysts began in
confusion and mistrust. Ittook several years to
reach workable accords, and the formal, long-
lasting agreements came after, not during, the
war.

(U) The trust that became the foundation of
the Cold War cooperation between the two
nations did not come easily. There were critical
months inlate 1942 and mid-1943 when it
appeared that what had been achieved since 1940
would be lost. The combination of British reluc-
tance, America’s divided armed services, misun-
derstood agreements, and lost messages almost
led to an end to the joint intelligence program.

(U) Ask and Then Not Receive
+S} Britain’s leaders had begun making over-
tures about sharing “scientific” information as

early as February 1940. When the suggestions
reached the American Army and Navy codebreak-

Page 89
—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, OBRAND NZEIAT

ers, they did not reject the possibility of some sort
of exchange. But Safford and his superiors in
Naval Communications soon cooled to the idea,
leaving William Friedman asthe only advocate
among the cryptanalysts.**

(U) Friedman could not deal face-to-face with
the British; frustrations grew and there was a
break inthe negotiations. There may have been
vague promises of full cryptologic cooperation
between Roosevelt and Churchill in mid-1940,
but they did not lead to any significant exchanges
among the codebreakers. 3°

(U) Then after Britain began tosend the
United States Navy information onthe disposi-
tion of German forces, it appeared that an agree-
ment about anexchange ofsecrets was immi-
nent.4

(U) InSeptember 1940 William Friedman
drew up a detailed plan for cooperation between
the two nations only toencounter a wary
American navy that again blocked its implemen-
tation.

—€$But the navy did not have its way. The War
Department's representatives made agreements
for “full” exchange of information in December
and exerted enough political pressure to sweep
away the navy’s objections.** OP-20-G was given
orders to cooperate. It was told to select two men
to join an army and FBI team that was to sail to
England.

-$}The navy was unhappy about being forced
to exchange its secrets in spring 1941. Then when
the Americans concluded that what Britain was
willing toshow the Americans was much less
than expected, some in the American cryptanalyt-
iccommunity became furious over the balance
between what America gave to GC&CS and what
it got in return. °°

Page 90

(U) Gave All and Got...

(U) The delegation of American cryptanalysts
from OP-20-G, the army’s SIS, and the FBI had
sailed for England in late January. They handed
over two extremely valuable analogs of the Purple
machine for the Japanese diplomatic ciphers, two
copies of another Japanese enciphering machine,
and all the other keys to the top secret Magic sys-
tem. In addition, all that the United States had on
major Japanese attaché, navy, and consular codes
was surrendered. As with the Purple machines,
giving those paper copies ofthe codes to Britain
meant fewer were available to America’s own
codebreakers.*” The American generosity did not
end there, however. Britain was promised a con-
tinuous flow of cryptologic information, including
the American Coast Guard’s methods of tapping
the German clandestine systems.”*

(U) Inreturn, GC&CS opened its doors and
made the American visitors feel quite welcome.
But it gave them very little of real value, at least
about “E.”

CSAS At first the Americans thought the
British were completely open. Although the
Americans were told to pose as Canadians, they
felt that few restrictions had been imposed on
them. They accepted the order against taking any
notes on what they were shown and took having
to sign a binding security oath as reasonable.

~€S}-They felt they had been told all about the
British attack against Italian, South American,
and Russian systems.*? GC&CS also shared its
work onJapanese naval systems. And the
Americans were shown the Bombe. The navy’s
men were given apaper version ofan Enigma,
were handed acopy ofa few days’ worth of old
keys, and given a part of a “short” catalog.

(U) The army’s representatives were given
similar information, and they and the navy men
were informed of the earlier successes against the
FOP-SEGRETIGOMINFIREL-F6-U6A,AUS-CAN-OBR AND -NZEHET

German air force’s “E” and the system Germany
had used during the Norwegian campaign. *°

(U) What they did not get was what many had
thought the trip across the Atlantic was really for,
the cryptanalytic keys tothe naval Enigma. The
Americans did not obtain an Enigma machine or
enough cryptanalytic information toallow the
United States to break into the submarine “E” on
its own.”

(UC) What Happened After

(U) Although the American visitors to
Bletchley Park may have left too soon to be told of
the successes of mid-1941, the British could have
been much more open than they were during the
remainder of the year.

4¥5> Despite GC&CS’s proclamation that full
cooperation was in force, the American navy men
had not been given an adequate explanation of
the logic ofthe Bombe during their visit, were
probably not indoctrinated into Banburismus,
and were told little about the art of obtaining
cribs for the naval Enigma attack.** The FBI and
army representatives were also not told all.

“CPS)-A U. S. Navy historical report on the “E”
problem stated:** “Prior tothe outbreak of the
war with Germany, the nature ofthe German
machine employed bythe Atlantic U-boats was
known inthat the British had supplied to this
Division diagrams of the wiring and the wheels of
the device, together with a description of the way
inwhich it moved. Beyond this and some few
examples of plain text, nothing was known as to
the usage of neither the device nor the method in
which the keys could be recovered. It was then
known that the British had conducted a success-
ful attack, but the details of it were unavailable to
the American Navy, due to the reluctance of the
British to discuss the same.”

—€?8/75-The desire of the British to safeguard
their secret powers was reflected by their failure

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUS,CAN OBR AND NZLIM

tocommunicate the news or details of their

achievements to the Americans after March 1941.
Little cryptanalytic information crossed the
Atlantic although some vigorous protest came
from OP-20-G beginning in July 1941.4 Even a
visit to America in late summer by a very impor-
tant British cryptanalyst did not lead tothe

Americans being told of the ways to attack “E.” ®

(VU) Trust Builds Very Slowly

(U) For a year after the American delegation
left England, there were few direct contacts
between the two nations’ cryptanalysts. There
were some negotiating sessions about the range
and degree of cooperation, but during the
remainder of 1941 it seemed to many Americans
that Britain became less, not more, willing to
yield its growing pool of Enigma secrets.*°

—€F5} The situation became quite tense by
November. OP-20-G’s men convinced the
Director of Naval Communications to send a very
strong protest to England. Hetold GC&CS he
thought that the earlier agreement was not being
fulfilled and demanded animmediate flow of
cryptanalytic information. The British responded
with true diplomacy explaining that all that had
been promised had been sent to the United States
and that it would be impossible for them to send
everything that the American navy “might” want.
It was better, they said, for the Americans to
request specific information. Then ifthe British
judged itwas really ofimport tothe United
States, it would be sent. A quite similar message
was forwarded tothe American army. Although
England began to send information on German
diplomatic systems to Friedman’s group, England
continued to keep its “E” methods a secret.”

(UL) Agreements and
Agreements, But....

and Agreements

(F87/8D OP-20-G was, of course, very unhap-
py about being required to ask for specifics; they
did not know enough to compile alist. But the

Page 91
TOR-SECRETHICOMINTHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN- GBR AND NECIAT

tension was relieved bysome end-of-year
exchanges. When Laurance Safford finally
received some replies tohis earlier inquiries,
when Britain hinted they would soon send a copy
oftheir “machine” and atechnician to America,
and when GC&CS apologized for losing some
American letters within its bureaucracy, “G”
sensed it was going to be made a full cryptologic
partner.48

(U) Under some prodding from the United
States, additional agreements were made in early
and mid-1942, ones that began to move the two
nations toward a level of unprecedented coopera-
tion. Then the sweeping October 1942 accords
eased some tensions raised by an American navy
threat to go its own way on Enigma. After that,
the BRUSA pact of May 1943 was amajor step
toward openness with the army.*?

(U) But it was not until the UKUSA agreement
of 1946 that the two nations forged that unique
relationship oftrust that was maintained
throughout the Cold War.”

(U) There were more than afew frictions on
the road to BRUSA and UKUSA; during 1942 and
1943 the British were slow to reveal all about
Ultra, especially during 1942. The American
cryptanalysts had interpreted the agreements of
1941 to mean that Britain was to share all and that
America was to become a full partner in Ultra.
Although negotiating separately, both “G” and the
SIS concluded the same thing. They expected that
Britain would give them all they needed, if they
wished to read “E” systems. A copy of the British
Bombe designed for the older three-wheel
machines was expected by “G” before the summer
of 1942, and some Americans thought that all
British information on new Bombes for the naval
four-wheel Enigma would be immediately sent
across the Atlantic. The British did not seem to
agree.

Page 92

(©) Going Separate Ways?

CESA4S58 When “G’s” frantic February 1942
plea for help against Enigma inthe Atlantic did
not get aresponse, tempers flared again. OP-20-
G’s new commander, Captain Redman, under
intense pressure from Admiral King to do some-
thing about the Atlantic submarine crisis, con-
cluded that GC&CS had been giving America the
“runaround.” It did not take him long to secure
permission to begin another and very determined
series of negotiations with the British. With
Joseph Wenger athis side, Redman began to
make it very clear that unless cooperation began
immediately, the American navy would go its own
way despite any of the danger that two uncoordi-
nated attacks on Enigma might pose.

FS} When the Americans came to realize that
the U-boat commanders had made a radical
change in their “E” systems and that the British
claims of imminent reentry were far from true,
they began to take action. *

¢¥S}-Britain sensed there was acrisis and
decided to send one ofits most important code-
breakers to America. He was told tocalm the
Americans without, however, giving them
GC&CS’s great secrets. When Colonel John
Tiltman arrived in April 1942, he found it impos-
sible to agree with official British policy. The
American navy’s codemen were so adamant and
their threats to go their own way were so credible
that Tiltman advised England that it must yield.>*

€FS)-The final breakthrough seemed to come
in May 1942. Promises came from England that a
Bombe and atechnician would bein America
before autumn and that men from “G” would be
invited to Bletchley Park.5? There was some hope
that the American army’s cryptanalysts might be
allowed into the “E” circle. GC&CS signaled that it
would accept some help from Leo Rosen, SIS’s
electronics expert.>4
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-USA_AUS-CAN- OBR AND NZL

CFS). But the May promises did not end
American suspicions, nor did they lead “G” to
trust the solution of “E” tothe British. Adding to
the tensions, there was disagreement over the
details of when and how “G's” experts were to be
allowed back into Bletchley Park. Then, when a
copy of the latest English Bombe was not shipped
to America on schedule, when it took six months
of requests to obtain promised blueprints, when
Britain kept insisting that the United States work
only on Japanese problems, and when it was clear
that England did not want to give anything to the
SIS, some American codebreakers again became
very skeptical of British intentions.

“C#S} The suspicions led to action. Despite the
recent accords, in August 1942 OP-20-G felt it
had to protest about the failure ofthe British to
keep their promises. Also, the relations between
SIS and GC&CS became very tense. The army-
British relationship became so strained that
protests reached the White House.

(U) America without an Ultra

(U) Atits entry into the war, OP-20-G had
only the most rudimentary knowledge ofthe
Enigma and was not at all sure about the contours
ofthe new U-boat system.®° Some disgruntled
American officers blamed Britain’s unwillingness
to share, but the reasons why American cryptan-
alysts were helpless lay in America, not Europe.*”

(U) Since the turn ofthe century, America’s
strategic planners had seen Japan as the enemy.
Some inthe American military did worry about
Germany, but it seemed beyond imagination that
France and Britain would be unable to contain
her on the continent. Few thought they would fail
to block Germany’s navy and air force from mak-
ing the Atlantic unsafe for America. The concen-
tration onJapan led toanother dangerous
assumption: No matter what the enemy did, the
United States would have the time to prepare
itself for war.

FOR-SEGRETHICOMIFHHREL F0-USA-AUES-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEIK4

(U) Those assumptions were accompanied by
ones about the nation’s economy. Fundamental
was that American industry would automatically
provide any great technological advances needed
bythe military. It is no wonder that the calls by
men such asHooper and Bowen for ongoing
research and Bush’s drive to establish govern-
ment-sponsored science remained largely unan-
swered.>*

(U) Despite a lack of resources, by spring 1941
American naval ships were involved in dangerous
scrapes with German U-boats in the Atlantic. By
autumn the Americans were ordered to escort
England-bound convoys.

(U) OP-20-G was as unprepared as the rest of
the navy. To fulfill its obligations in the Atlantic,
itexpanded its interception net. To please
England, it put most of its men on tactical analy-
sis rather than codebreaking. At the same time,
the navy’s cryptanalytic ally, the Coast Guard,
launched an attack on German clandestine mes-
sages. But the spy messages and the bits and
pieces from some cracks inthe German diplo-
matic systems yielded little about the German
navy. OP-20-G had no effective Atlantic crypto-
logic power, and the navy had to rely upon British
supplied intelligence.”

(U) When the U-boat command changed its
Enigma and Hitler unleashed his American war,
OP-20-G’s cryptanalytic weakness became intol-
erable. When it was realized that Britain was
closed out of the U-boats’ new M4 Enigma Shark
system and as Britain seemed more interested in
the German army and air force systems, OP-20-G
decided to find its own way to penetrate Enigma.

(U) An American Ultra, Perhaps

—tt//SB- In spring 1942 the American navy
was ordered to start forging its own “E” capabili-

ty. Despite the crisis inthe Pacific and the old
hopes of building general-purpose computers,
Howard’s men and those in “M” were ordered to

Page 93
FOR-SEGRETIGOMINTIREL-FO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND- NEE

focus on the Atlantic Shark problem and to pro-
duce an immediate solution.©

(U) When the decision was made to create its
own “E” solution, OP-20-G was very short-hand-
edand had toturn much ofthe work over to
Engstrom’s group of college men in the “M” sec-
tion. They began with few tools and the burden
of Britain’s fears ofan independent American
Ultra capability.

(U) Faster Than a Speeding Relay

(U) Bletchley Park’s very overworked men
had let almost a year slip by without focusing sig-
nificant resources ona Bombe for M4, the four-
wheel U-boat Enigma.** The Germans’ introduc-
tion of additional encryption wheels an operator
could choose from also presented agreat chal-
lenge. Changes inthe related German codes,
radio networks, and procedures compounded the
problems.

(U) GC&CS called onthe famous Wynn-
Williams and asked him to explore the use of elec-
tronics for a super-bombe. Williams spent many
frustrating months trying to create an electronic
Bombe. His efforts stretched into spring 1942
with little more to show than a breadboard model
ofa primitive “E” wheel. While he was asked to
make afresh start onhis ideas, GC&CS turned
back to “Doc” Keen and BTMC. Immediately the
pragmatic Keen rejected anelectronic solution
and began to give some thought to alternatives.
He created the outlines ofa new four-wheel
Bombe but advised GC&CS that it might take
more than ayear todesign and build the first
model.** His prediction proved correct. Britain
would not have the first of its very few tempera-
mental electromechanical four-wheel Bombes
until early summer 1943.°°

(U) Great British Expectations

(U) Meanwhile, Wynn-Williams continued to
plod along with his ideas; by midyear he began to

construct a prototype of his Bombe. To his disap-
pointment, it had to rely as much on mechanics
as on electronics.

“CFS}/5B- Williams had decided tobuild a
complex attachment for the regular three-wheel
British Bombes. His Cobra was to be a large box
that was to contain his new high-speed electronic
wheel and newly designed control and “hit” loca-
tion devices. At first he bet that he could coax
electronics to do the entire job. It took a long time
to admit even partial defeat, but he had to back
away from his original plan. He turned his Cobra
into a combination of very high-speed commuta-
tors (3,000 rpm) and electronic memory and
control circuits.

C4548. The compromise did not lead to
immediate success, however. Williams had asked
agreat deal of electronics and mechanics. The
Cobra was planned tobe exceptionally fast. In
addition to the tube circuits and the new wheels,
run time was to be shortened by recording “hits”
without stopping the Bombe. All that was too
much for Williams’ small team. His first machine
had to suffer the indignity of a thorough rework-
ing at the end of 1943 before it had done any oper-
ational work. Although adozen ofhis new
Bombes were eventually employed in England,
they remained temperamental. ©

(U) Great American Expectations

(U) While Williams and Keen were rushing to
find their technological answers tothe M4,
GC&CS learned of America’s Ultra intentions.
Frightened by what it discovered, in spring 1942
it rushed a group of its leaders to the States hop-
ing to reach an understanding that would protect
its Ultra monopoly.

(U) March 1942 saw Britain strike the first of
a series of new bargains. It assured OP-20-G that
Shark was about to be beaten, and it agreed to
share more Enigma information with the navy. In
exchange, itasked “G” toconcentrate onthe

Page 94 TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USA-AUS; CAN GBR AND NZL
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TOUSK, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZUIXT

Japanese problems and let Britain manage
European intelligence. The Americans desired
cordial relations with the British, but they would
not abandon Enigma. “G” agreed to cooperate but
stood byits commitment toan American pro-
gram.

(U) Despite two years of “understandings”
with the British, OP-20-G launched into its own
Enigma and Bombe programs without a true
understanding ofthe Atlantic Enigma or the
British Bombe. The historic OP-20-G directive of
April 1942 gave avery incomplete view of
Enigma, Shark, and the British Bombe. America’s
experts were able to outline only the workings of
the older three-wheel plugboard version of
Enigma, and they seemed uncertain about a key
component, the reflector. Furthermore, OP-20-
G’s memorandum contained only the most gener-
al ideas about the British Bombe’s logic.°”

(U) While waiting for the promised informa-
tion from England, “G’s” men were told to define
atrue American Bombe. Given all they did not
know about Turing’s and Welchman’s methods
and machines, the first plans for the American
Bombe do not seem too bizarre.

€F8/4SD. OP-20-G made Howard Engstrom’s
young men responsible for the Bombe project.
The closest “G” had toan Enigma expert,
Lieutenant Commander R.B. Ely, was charged
with devising the logic ofthe machine. After
reviewing all the methods he knew to attack “E,”
he suggested that “G” might have to turn to a crib-
based approach.

CS4/Sb—Fly, armed with only afew hints
about how the British machine worked (gained
through some test problems the British had pre-
viously sent over), independently arrived ata
primitive version ofthe architecture Turing had
designed three years before. Assoon ashe was
able to sketch the logic of his machine, he sought
an engineer. Not unexpectedly, one of the young
men from MIT was selected.

“TOP-SECRETHCOHINFHREL-FO-VEA-AUS-GAN-GBR-ANDNZLIUXI

G8448R-John Howard was asked to solve the
hardware and manufacturing problems. While
Howard discussed possibilities with men such as
Joe Desch of NCR,” Ely asked for help from oth-
ers in Engstrom’s section. He wanted assistance
tocheck his ideas against cryptanalytic needs.
And he wanted help finding, if it was possible, an
architecture for acomputer more universal than
Turing’s. Soon Ely’s original ideas were reshaped.

G@SYSD The conception ofwhat the
American navy’s Bombe would be was logically
primitive but technically grandiose. In spring
1942 “G’s” men knew so little about the Enigma
systems they did not include the important
instantaneous stecker setting tester in their
design, and they thought their machine could use
permanently fixed “wheels.” As important, they
thought they would have to have either a separate
Bombe for each of the wheel combinations and
permutations or one truly giant machine.

CESS Apparently, as late as early summer
1942, Britain had not informed them of the “diag-
onal board,” the many methods its codebreakers
had devised to reduce the number of wheel com-
binations to be tested, nor how many different
wheels the Germans made available with the M4.
“G” did not know that the British had found it
wise to leave tests for Enigma ring-settings and
wheel starting-points off their Bombes.”

CESA-SB “G's” technical visions were far from
backwards, however. Assoon asthe idea ofan
American Bombe had emerged, electronics
became the focus of attention. A breadboard
model ofa “wheel” was begun. Completing it
would not be easy because the Enigma wheel was
difficult to imitate, and constructing a universal
one was a daunting task. Cloning one wheel with
known wiring meant having twenty-six tubes
connected to twenty-six others and having a rack
of supplementary circuitry. A universal “wheel”
needed 26 x 26 tubes and all the circuitry needed
to switch them as needed to imitate any ofthe
possible wiring connections.

Page 95
TOR-SECRETICOMINTIREL-TO-UGA-AUS-CAN- GBR AND TZLINT

F575 But Howard and the other navy
engineers were soconfident about electronics
that as early as April 1942 Wenger was informing
the British that American electronics might save
their Bombe program. The faith in an electronic
solution continued well into the summer, and
some thought the American Bombe might turn
out tobe asingle high-speed and complex tube
machine that would do as much as or more than
all of the British mechanical monsters.”

(34/455 Such amachine could save much
time because it would also automatically reset the
wheel(s) for each run and would never have to
stop to record “hits.” It was to have a high-speed
system to photograph the diagonal board and a
set of counters that would record the wheel posi-
tions at each hit.

CFSHSD Those time-savers were secondary,
however. What was important was the speed of
electronics. In early spring it was thought that the
American Bombe could do its job if it performed
10,000 tests asecond. Faith inthe machine’s
speed was necessary because it was going to be
asked todo much more than Turing’s Bombe. It
would test for the some 300 possible wheel
orders, the 440,000 [sic]stecker possibilities,
and the ring settings.”

(FE4SH Soon itwas realized that even
greater faith in electronics was required. When
the run time for all that was recalculated, the need
for much faster electronics was realized. Given
the way the Americans were designing their
Bombe atthe time, one large one, a feasible
machine called for circuits that could make mil-
lions of tests per second. That kind of speed was
far beyond the electronics of the 1940s, but there
was no indication that frightened the Americans.
They had such engineering optimism and knew
they could command so many resources that, if
one electronic machine would not do the job, per-
haps 300 orso oftheir special electronic “crib-
bers” could be built.”

Page 96

(U) While Engstrom’s men were exploring
their options and while they waited for the
expected flow ofinformation about the Bombe
and allied methods from England, “G” continued
on with its fight to achieve Wenger’s old dream of
using pure techniques. OP-20-G’s new college
men intensified their search for advanced pure
statistical and mathematical methods and
machines. Hypo, Tessie and the Comparator were
still seen as general- rather than special-purpose
alternatives.

(U) But as summer arrived, the crew at‘G”
started to become angry and worried. Little help-
ful information had come from England, and the
two men OP-20-G planned to send to Bletchley
Park were not scheduled to leave until July.”

(5//50-GC&CS was being more open with the
Americans and informed them ofthe Fish sys-
tems. But Britain’s codemen still seemed to hold
back onthe Bombes and what was necessary to
their success, the methods of finding surefire
cribs. Although offering GC&CS full information
onall the advanced high-speed cryptanalytic
machines it was developing,”® OP-20-G was made
to wait for a reply to its specific requests and for a
clear statement of British policy on cryptanalytic
cooperation. © Especially frustrating were the
delays in providing Bombe details. Requesting
blueprints of Britain’s “latest”? machines in May,
the Americans hoped their examination would
prevent them from committing to an American
Bombe that was inefficient or simply unworkable.
The prints did not arrive as promised.

CS44SD The Americans were under too much
pressure to accept the continued stream of British
“excuses.” By the time Ely and Eachus were ready
todepart for GC&CS, Joseph Wenger and his
superiors became convinced that Britain would
never finish the four-wheel Bombe they had
promised to have working by mid-1942. Worse,
they thought that the British had not lived up to
the agreements that had been made since
America entered the war. Less than guarded

—FOP-SECREFICOMINTIREL-TO-USA- AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZI
—FOR-SEGRETCOMINFHREL FOG AUS -GAN-SER-AND-NZE—

words were used insome ofthe exchanges
between “G” and England.”

—CES//SB The British reacted to the American
protests bysending more information, hoping
that “G” would reverse its decision to build its
own anti-Enigma capability. OP-20-G gradually
learned more about Britain’s cryptanalytic meth-
ods, including those used to avoid testing all “E”
wheel combinations. And when the two men from
“G,” Ely and Eachus, reached Bletchley Park, they
began shipping home the detailed information
the navy had sought for the last two years.

-S4/SB But the Americans remained very
worried. They feared they would be unable to
build their more universal machine or their own
version of the English Bombe. Worse, OP-20-G’s
leaders deeply feared that even if they built such a
Bombe, they would always remain dependent
upon Britain for the necessary copies of captured
“FE” wheels, codebooks, and cribs.”

(U) Trying to Step Forward, Nat Back

(U) Afew atOP-20-G were convinced that
America could beat England’s famed Wynn-
Williams toa _ super-high-speed electronic
machine, but others inthe OP-20-G group were
less sure of an independent American success.

(U) Although Ely and Eachus were sending
back important information, the navy continued
to have to formally request much on the English
Bombe and the emerging new solutions to the
Enigma systems. More fundamental, by the end
of the summer the Americans became concerned
that Britain would never devote enough resources
to the Atlantic U-boat problem.” There was some
foundation for the American anxiety.

(VU) Britain’s Own
Electronic Dreams

Version of Bush’s

€F5//S- In late spring 1942, as part of the
reallocation of GC&CS resources, Wynn-Williams

—FOPR-SEGRETIGOMINFHREE-TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBR AND NZDT

was asked to turn his Bombe work over to some-
one else and to take on another job: devise a high-
speed engine to crack the binary additive system
ofthe Fish machines. He agreed, and while con-
tinuing on with his electronic Bombe work he
designed the first of the Robinson rapid analytic
machines.*° Very soon, the designs were turned
into hardware, electronic hardware.

€¥8748B-The first Robinson (Heath) was
delivered in early 1943, well before any of the
newest models of Bush’s Comparators reached
OP-20-G’s headquarters. They were based ona
statistical attack, not the type of crude crib-bash-
ing of the Bombes.** Robinson used high-speed
punched tapes, photoelectric readers, and some
one hundred gas-filled tubes to keep track of
results.** The Robinsons shared something else
with Bush’s machines, the very serious problem
of keeping the tapes in alignment. There were dif-
ferences, however. The Robinson’s target was a
binary additive system. That called for a different
use of the tapes. One tape was for a message; the
other held the stream of “key.”

€FS/4SH-Fortunately for the British and the
history of computers, that binary stream present-
ed an opportunity to avoid the difficulty of align-
ing the tapes. When it was realized that the sec-
ond Robinson tape was astream of algorithm-
generated bits, it was suggested that a machine be
constructed that substituted tube circuits for the
additive tape. Reckoning that the number of
tubes needed for the generation of binary combi-
nations was reasonable, GC&CS gave the green
light to construction of the Colossus. *?

(U) The Colossus was something of a miracle
of project management. It took less than a year to
create what many consider the finest electronic
pre-computer. Colossus kept 2,500 tubes and a
high-speed photoelectric paper tape reader in
synchronization. It could even be coaxed into per-
forming some primitive program steps and “if”
statements.

Page 97
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS--GAN-GBR-AND-NZLUKG

€FS//SH Colossus was very smart. Itfol- |
lowed some of Turing’s maxims about how
to save search time. It had an electronic cir-
cuit that polled its counters tosee ifthe
results of the run were building toa signifi-
cant outcome. This “sigmage” circuit saved
hundreds of hours of machine and analyst
effort. It also prevented Colossus from print-
ing the result ofevery pass ofthe tapes,
something the wasteful Comparators and
the first Robinsons could not do.**

(U) The first of more than ten versions of
Colossus was put into operation in January
1944.°5

(U) The Americans Almost Beat England
to Electronics

(U) The U-boat rampage in the Atlantic
led to extreme criticisms ofthe American
navy while the army was becoming worried
that its men would go into battle in Africa
and Europe without an“E” capability.
Politically dangerous, Britain was giving
them far less than the already meager ration
of Enigma information it was providing the navy.

(U) Responding to all the various pressures,
OP-20-G put even more resources into its frantic
effort to conquer the U-boat “E,” and the army
began to think of the machines it might need for
what it called the “Yellow Problem.”* The army’s
SIS had difficulties obtaining information and
resources and did not launch a machine program
until the fall, but atthe beginning of summer
1942, OP-20-G hinted it had a solution to the M4.
Within another two months it announced that its
men had beaten Britain and the great Wynn-
Williams tothe creation ofthe heart ofa fully
electronic Bombe.®*’ The circuit wasn’t the univer-
sal machine “G” wanted, but no time was lost in
trying to exploit the development. NCR was taken
over by the navy to be a research center and pos-
sibly a production site. John Howard’s old group
became anintegral part of Howard Engstrom’s

Page 98

[Ser rs io ee

 

/
a ee a ee a

Be Se eR UT ee ee

5 Tie le Ose SLT ia

7 oe
q

(U) Colossus

“M” as it was reorganized to oversee the electron-
ic Bombe work at NCR.

(U) Wenger, Engstrom, and their like had to
show some results.** The Bombe became impor-
tant to “M’s” survival as well as to the Battle of the
Atlantic.

(U) No Time for Electronic

(U) In late summer 1942 the engineers of the
“M” group decided their work was far enough
along to submit itto an experienced production
engineer for examination. Of course, they turned
to Joe Desch. He spent almost two months exam-
ining their bench model and their designs for an
electronic Bombe.*? Hecame toa devastating
conclusion: An electronic Bombe was an impossi-
bility!°° A universal machine would need thou-
sands more tubes and even higher speeds. The

FOR-SEGRETHCOMINFHREL—TO-UGAAUG-GAN-GBRAND-NZEHE
TORSECRETICOMINTIREL-TO-U6A-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZDE-

thousands of tubes would be difficult to acquire,
would create too much heat, and would demand
more electrical power than could be supplied.”

(VU) A Crisis of Organization and Technology

(U) Desch commanded so much respect that
the responsibility for a new design was shifted to
him. Necessarily, he was informed ofone of
America and Britain’s great secrets, Ultra. After
additional study of what was known about the
Turing Bombe, he promised that he would be able
to produce anelectromechanical machine that
could tackle the Shark M4. He declared he could
create an original American Bombe but a non-
electronic one.

(U) Immediately, anew effort, the second
American Bombe project, was begun. As a result,
Wenger’s dream ofa Rapid Machine program
was saved. For most ofthe remaining war years,
the electromechanical Bombes devoured the
energies of “G’s” engineers. To fulfill the commit-
ment to Desch’s necessary backward technologi-
cal leap, all the truly advanced projects and ideas
were made stepchildren.

(U) The second American Bombe project
almost faltered, but it eventually became a tri-
umph for OP-20-G and the American intelligence
community. The success of the Bombes and the
Allied work on machines for the Pacific war final-
lyestablished the credibility Wenger needed to
try to make research a permanent part of OP-20-
G’s peacetime operations.

(U) Searching for a Place in Ultra

(U) The second American Bombe project was
part ofan attempt to readjust the relationship
between Britain and America’s codebreakers.
Desch may not have known it, but his Bombe was
essential to OP-20-G gaining a greater role in the
Ultra Secret and to becoming a producer of oper-
ational information. Without an American
Bombe, the United States would have remained a

“TOP-GECREHIGOMINFHREL-TO-UEAAUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NELII

consumer of British-controlled Ultra informa-
tion, and OP-20-G would have continued under
the old understanding: Both nations could pursue
independent (unaided) research, but Britain
would control all operational activities. Although
Britain had begun to ask for American help on the
Atlantic problems, with the failure of the second
Bombe project it would have been very reluctant
to make OP-20-G an equal partner.**

657458 The friction with Britain over Ultra
intensified soon after the approval of Desch’s
sketch of a modified British machine. The navy’s
men became intolerant of what they considered
broken promises by the British about their four-
wheel Bombe.*? OP-20-G more than hinted that
itwould build asmany as350 ofthe Desch
machines before spring 1943 when the U-boats
were expected to launch amass attack. America
was notifying Britain that no matter what it took,
the United States would win the U-boat war.?*
The Americans declared they intended to build
enough machines to test all Shark wheel orders
simultaneously. 7°

(U) The Power of Innocence

(U) Given all that the Americans did not know
about the Bombes and all that was required to
make them useful, miracles were required.
Joseph Desch’s first description ofthe proposed
“G” Bombe and its powers reveals how much the
American Bombe program was based upon the
type of optimism that comes from innocence, if
not ignorance. ”°

~<FS4/55 Some ofthe detailed plans ofthe
three-wheel British Bombes had begun to reach
the United States inlate summer 1942, but
Desch’s design was his own. He had begun his
plans before the British had revealed more than
the bare essentials of their machine and the crib-
based “menus” that made it work. % And he
arrived at his first design before he had been able
to test his assumptions about the way the essen-
tial components of his Bombe would behave.

Page 99
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL-TO USA, AUS CAN OBR AND NZEIKT

6S448B Desch’s plans were technically opti-
mistic. He thought it possible to create a drive
system that could keep twenty-four double-ended
Enigma analogs (ninety-six commutators) in per-
fect synchronization. A large electric motor would
drive a high-speed shaft that would directly turn
the shafts for the fast wheels. Gears, machined for
complex ratios, would connect the high-strength
rods for the slower wheels to the main shaft. The
gears and shafts had to be ofthe highest quality
material and workmanship to stand the stress
placed onthem when the machine suddenly
stopped and restarted.

<8} That was one unique feature ofthe pro-
posed American Bombe that would put Desch’s
faith in mechanics toa severe test. He proposed
an automatic stop, rewind, and restart system.
That would save critical running time and, as
important, avoid having the machine’s operators
having to hand-crank the device when a “stop”
was sensed.

4/55 Once the testing circuits identified a
possible “hit,” his machine would cut the power to
the main shaft, apply brakes and bring the com-
mutators to a halt all within a fraction of a second.
Then asecond motor would immediately drive
the commutators backwards until another circuit
signaled that the possible “hit” position had been
reached. The machine would then perform anoth-
er series of circuit tests, including a diagonal
board search. Ifthose tests indicated there were
no contradictions, the commutator positions and
the diagonal board indicators (the “story”) were
printed. Fortunately, “G” had not asked Desch to
build a machine that tested for the ring settings as
well as for the wheel orders and steckers.

—(6//Str immediately after the “stories” were
printed, the motor would be restarted, the clutch
onthe central high-speed shaft would be
engaged, the gears would mesh, and the commu-
tators would turn in synchronization until anoth-
er set of wheel positions indicated an Enigma set-
ting that might have produced the crib.

Page 100

—(S}Desch did not seem to worry about the
stresses that the quick stop, rewind, and restart
systems would put onthe shafts and gears, but
Alan Turing certainly did. When he visited NCR
in December, he warned “G” that it would be
unlikely that any machine could be kept in work-
ing order when it was asked to defy the laws of
inertia.

—&}-Desch did not back away from the auto-
matic rewind system nor did he change his mind,
during fall 1942, about having three complete
Bombes ina single rack. Such a configuration
would save precious space (336 Bombes with
32,000 commutators in 112 racks). He was con-
vinced that the frames would tolerate the heavy
vibrations from the three machines, which would
be independently starting and stopping.

-~S-Desch also kept his faith in the ability of
American technology tomake the “G” Bombe
more flexible and many orders faster than those
in operation in England. His Bombes were to be
very rapid, several times the speed ofthe British
three-wheel bombes and twice the speed of
England’s proposed four-wheel machines.” The
fast wheel was to revolve at 3,400 rpm. The oth-
ers would run at proportionately lower speeds,
turning only when their faster mate had complet-
eda full turn. The second wheel, for example,
would take one step after the fast wheel had made
acomplete twenty-six-point revolution, plus
additional revolutions to compensate for the time
the other wheels needed to turn over.

+5+When desired, the Bombe could be turned
into athree-wheel enigma analog, and, Desch
hoped, it could be run at various speeds.”

{S}Joseph Desch premised his design on the
power of America’s mass production methods to
make all parts ofthe Bombes interchangeable.
NCR’s machinists had assured Desch that he
could achieve his critical goal of having every
commutator fit on any ofthe thousands of spin-
dles on the Bombes. That was a critical feature. If

TOR_SECRETICOMINTIREL—TO-USAAUS-GAN-GBR-ANB-NZEHEE-
TOP-SECRETHC OMINTHREL TO -USAAUS;-CAN-CBRAND-NZEHE-

commutators had to be tailored to each machine,
his system would beimpractical. That would
demand too many highly skilled workers for com-
mutator construction and too many commuta-
tors, perhaps as many as 60,000.

-€3 Desch promised to make electronics as
well as mechanics gobeyond normal expecta-
tions. Hesaid he could overcome the problems
that had led most engineers to avoid the use of
tubes. A multitube Rossi detector circuit would
monitor the machines for possible “hits,” another
circuit would remember where the “hit” occurred,
one would control printing, and, he hinted,
another very complex one would handle the
“diagonal” test. He was not sure in September
1942 how many tubes each Bombe would have,
but his memoranda hinted that his electro-
mechanical machine would need perhaps as
many as1,500 electronic components.*°° The
high-speed diagonal board alone might need
more than 1,000 tubes.*™

LS} His September design asked more than
could be expected of gas-filled or vacuum tubes in
the early 1940s. His faith translated into the blind
hope that the navy’s engineers could keep more
than 300,000 tubes running atone time. “G”
wanted to run each wheel order simultaneously.
That meant 336 Bombes with perhaps 1,000
tubes each running without a flaw for perhaps as
long as an hour.

3 The electronics posed a serious challenge
tothe navy engineers. They would have to find
ways tohandle the heat generated bythe elec-
tronic components and create methods of identi-
fying troublesome tubes before they failed. Desch
went ahead, believing that the “G” would find a
way to overcome all the problems that had kept
men like Vannevar Bush from trying to build
large-scale electronic machines.

48} Joe Desch had to believe in the future of
electronics; his machine could not work at what
he thought was aminimum speed without elec-

—FOR-GEGRETHICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLHX4.

tronic switches. He could not build a “memory”
for the machine out of high-speed commutators,
relays were too slow for the “diagonal” test, and
simple capacitors seemed unable to do the job.

(U) The Power of Ignorance

—S Desch thought the navy needed so many
Bombes that ran so fast because the Americans
had not yet learned of the methods GC&CS used
to select the Enigma wheel orders that had to be
tested onthe Bombes. GC&CS had discovered
many ways oftelling which wheel orders the
Germans would not use during a crypto period.
They had also developed many cryptanalytic
techniques, which eliminated particular wheels
and wheel positions.

“S—As significant for the history ofthe
American Bombe project, in autumn 1942 “G’s”
experts did not fully understand the methods
Britain had developed to allow the Bombes to
quickly beat “chance.” Asa result, they had con-
cluded that the United States had no alternative
but to invest millions of dollars in machines that
were very inefficient.

—&//8P-The Bombes would be valuable only if
used properly. When they were given enough
information, they speedily reduced the number of
Enigma wheel orders that had to be examined by
the analysts. But ifused improperly, they could
not sort out the wheel orders and stecker settings
that could have produced the cribs by accident
from those settings that were “causal.” With only
relatively short crib-plain combinations to test,
twenty or so letters, a Bombe with a weak menu
might filter out only asmall proportion of the
incorrect settings. Desch, for example, feared that
typical menus would force analysts to comb
through athird ofa million possibilities after a
run of the 336 Bombes to locate the setting that
was the true Enigma key. 7°”

(U) Using analysts to search for Enigma set-
tings was time-consuming and expensive. Tests

Page 101
TOP SECRETHCONINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS; CAN -GBRAND-NZE—

took from seconds to hours, and some of them
demanded skilled if not just very devoted person-
nel. From the list of combinations that were not
eliminated bythe Bombes, analysts used other
machines and hand methods to see which was the
unique one that produced plain text from crib.
Thousands of analysts would be needed ifthe
Bombes did not eliminate all but a very few of the
Enigma settings.

+S} To be useful the Bombes had to eliminate
more than just those combinations that could not
possibly have produced the crib-plain combina-
tion; they had to filter those that were unlikely to
have done so. The only valuable pay-off from the
use of the Bombes was avery short list of very
likely “keys.” Unless the list was short, there
would be no significant savings in time and man-
power.

8} The only way tothat short list was
through the location oflong and accurate cribs
and the creation of powerful “menus.” Starting
with relatively long cribs, amenu was built
through searching for letter combinations and
connections (closures) between plain and cipher
that would allow the Bombe’s circuits to differen-
tiate “chance” relationships from those that were
caused by the true Enigma setting.

€FS474SD By mid-1942 GC&CS’s wizards had
turned menuing into a mathematical art. They
had discovered much since Turing’s first insights.
They had tables showing what types of menus
were needed to produce the desired short lists;
they found that wisely selected cribs reduced the
need to run all thirty-two of the Enigmas in their
Bombes; they could calculate how many time-
consuming machine stop and circuit checks
would be expected per menu; and they could pre-
dict how many possible wheel order and stecker
settings would be printed per run.

CFS} Strong menus were a necessity.

Otherwise, the Bombes might stop their wheels
and demand a return to the possible “hit” position

Page 102

so frequently that runs would take several

hours.*°

(S481) The British had also learned how
counterproductive it was to run the Bombes with-
out having 100 percent accurate cribs (a goal that
called for avast infrastructure) that yielded
robust menus. They reserved their Bombes for
menus that would produce no more than a hand-
ful of “stories” per run. By mid-1942 they had
learned how to select fifteen letter cribs that pre-
vented the Bombes from stopping more than a
dozen times and printing more than five possibly
true “settings” during arun. When the Germans
made the mistake of providing excellent cribs, the
Bombe could identify “the” and only “the” set-
ting.*°4

(SL4SB But Desch and the Americans had not
learned enough about cribs and menus by
September to envision or wait for Bombes that
would point to only a handful of possible solu-
tions. In September Joseph Desch estimated that
his ultra-high-speed Bombes would take, using
typical menus, thirteen and one-half hours to test
one wheel order on one Bombe. The reason: He
calculated that a Bombe would have to stop 3,000
times per run, perform its circuit tests, and then
decide whether or not to print its declaration that
ithad found a highly probable solution. On the
average, Desch estimated, the Bombe would sug-
gest that one of three stops had found a wheel
order that should be tested by an analyst.*°>

€$} If, as envisioned in early fall 1942, “G” was
to run its 336 machines simultaneously and con-
tinuously, the Bombes would spew out some
300,000 “probable” settings twice aday. How
“G” was towade through all that was not
divulged.

(S Even with the use ofthe best possible
menus, Desch’s Bombes seemed to demand great
manpower investments for the production of
timely intelligence. The navy’s commitment to
becoming a partner in Ultra is underscored by the

FOR-SEGRETHCOMINFTHREL-FO-U6 AAU EGAN -SBRANDNZEH—
FOR-GEGREFIGCOMMAHREL-FO-G6A-AUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZEH

acceptance of the consequences of Desch’s most
optimistic menu scenario. After consulting with
OP-20-G’s Enigma expert, Lieutenant Ely, Desch
held out some hope that “G” would eventually be
able to provide menus that would cut each
machine’s running time tothree hours and the
number of its stop-rewind sequences to less than
700 per run, per machine. That meant that “G’s”
experts would need to test some 40,000 prints
each day.’

(S}. The Americans were desperate. They
accepted the Bombe program despite Desch’s
estimates. They were willing to invest millions in
hardware and more in manpower for a system
that was very inefficient. Despite Desch’s esti-
mates of how long the Bombes would take to pro-
duce so few results, his report on the design of the
American Bombe was quickly approved. *””

(U) The Cousins Will Have Their Way...to A
Degree

(U) Although they questioned the ability of
“G” and its engineers to build a significant num-
ber of Bombes and to devise the menus needed
for them, the British had no choice but to take “G”
seriously and to make the best of the situation.
They quickly dispatched another cryptologic del-
egation to the United States.

<S//6B Accepting what seemed tobe the
inevitable, GC&CS agreed to help the Americans.
But they continued to argue that European intel-
ligence should beleft tothem. The British
explained more of their methods of avoiding the
need to run all the Bombe’s wheel combinations
and orders to test a message. They dropped hints
that “G” could expect asteady flow of valuable
cribs and solutions.

+4S+465 The British seemed to be even more
generous when they agreed to a new arrangement
inthe Pacific. But they gave up very little and
gained much byallowing OP-20-G torun the
cryptanalytic and intercept operations in the area.

FOP-SECRETHEOMINTHREL—TO-USA,AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIDE—

(S448 In exchange for Britain closing down
some minor centers and allowing the Americans
to direct the codebreakers in Australia, the
American Navy promised to send, if practical, all
raw and processed information about the Pacific
tothe British. Given how few resources Britain
had inthe region, it gained more than it relin-
quished.

€S/7/ST) The Americans offered even more.
They volunteered to provide GC&CS with copies
of “G’s” newest RAM devices and to train its tech-
nicians in their use.*©®

(S448) In contrast, the Americans obtained
much less than they hoped for in the Atlantic. It
was agreed that the British would accede “to U.S.
desires with regard to work on the German sub-
marine and naval problem,” but Britain, in effect,
would be “the coordinating head inthe Atlantic
theater as the U.S. will be in the Pacific.”

(S#/SB The previous pledge to give “G” advice
on analytical machinery was reaffirmed, and it
was agreed “in principle” that Britain would col-
laborate with “G” and send needed cribs, menus,
and intercepts as long as the security of Ultra was
not endangered. ‘°°

(S44SP In response to Britain’s bowing-out in
the Pacific, to its providing more knowledge of
Bombe techniques, and to its obvious determina-
tion to keep control ofthe European Ultra, the
Americans tentatively agreed to build only one
hundred Bombes.”°

(S$) One hundred in this case meant a total of
100 four-wheel Enigma analogs, in contrast to the
Desch plan to have 100 racks with three Bombes
each.

(FS4/5H They also agreed tokeep their
Bombe design very fluid so they could respond to
emergencies. “G’s” technicians were also made
aware they might be asked to play a backup role
for GC&CS. Like the rest of Britain’s military,

Page 103
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZHE—

GC&CS began tothink itcould depend upon
America’s industrial capabilities. Inlate 1942
there were indications it might be forced to. “Doc”
Keen’s factories were stretched beyond their lim-
its. America would be needed to handle cryptana-
lytic machine emergencies.”

(U) “G” seemed ready to accept that role. It
also did not reject Britain’s suggestion that all
Ultra-based naval actions be coordinated ones.
There certainly was no hesitation when GC&CS
asked the navy for a firm pledge to do everything
needed to make Ultra America’s most guarded
secret."*

(U) The October 1942 negotiations did lead to
Britain giving “M” asomewhat greater opera-
tional role, or at least preparing them for one.
GC&CS’s representatives set “M’s” men to using
hand methods on various German systems and
gave them more instructions on how to prepare
menus (setups) for the Bombes.“* During the
next few months more and more technical details
about Ultra flowed to the United States, and more
of Engstrom’s bright young men in “M” traveled
to England towork at GC&CS. But the British
retained the power to decide what information
would and would not leave Bletchley Park.

(U) A Long Apprenticeship

448/85 A year after the October 1942 agree-
ment, atthe end of 1943, “G” remained an
appendage to Britain’s European Ultra. In
November Howard Engstrom traveled to
England to hear something quite like a lecture
about “M” wasting valuable resources by running
the Bombes onvery weak American-devised
menus. Hehad toagree toa return to using
British cribs and menus. It was not until much
later in 1944, after “M” had enough good inter-
cepts, and after its cryptanalysts had honed their
menuing skills, that “M” was granted effective
independence concerning the Atlantic U-boat
problem. 5

Page 104

(U) It took along time for “G’s” men to gain
the necessary skills and to build an effective anti-
Enigma organization. There was progress, but it
came slowly. In early 1943 American cryptana-
lysts were applying GC&CS paper and tabulating
machine techniques to crack some German mes-
sages intercepted by the British.

F848) But most of the first half of 1943 was
along practice session for the Americans. Using
GC&CS-supplied keys, they deciphered and ana-
lyzed the large American backlog of intercepted
Atlantic traffic. Then GC&CS forwarded new mes-
sages and their keys.

£48/78D To aid the deciphering process, the
navy’s men in Washington built anew electro-
mechanical device, the M8. The M8 was not an
analytical machine, but soon after its appearance
in October 1942 it became an invaluable tool for
“G's” analysts. More refined models began to
appear in spring 1943. The M8s were reworked
versions of the Americans’ own automatic wheel-
based encryption machine, the ECM. The navy
yard’s engineers added aplugboard, Enigma
wheels and Letterwriter equipment toturn the
ECM into an automatic and relatively high-speed
“translation” machine. Once the wheels and plug-
board were set, the “stories” from the Bombes
could be rapidly tested, or entire messages could
be deciphered atrates upto 600 letters per
minute. A few months later the Mg, another sim-
ple Enigma analog, appeared. The Mg was a very
sparse combination of wheels and plugboard that
was extremely useful once the Bombes were in
operation. An Mg was later placed near every set
of Bombes, allowing their operators to make
immediate checks of printouts and to locate miss-
ing Enigma plugboard settings."°

CESS But much ofthe American Ultra
effort of 1942 and 1943 proceeded without the
help of automation. Enormous human resources
were put into apaper version ofa bombe: a
1,000,000-page catalog that could beused to
TORSECRET/COMMAHREL—FO-U6AAUS-CAN-GBR AND NZOIAT

drag ashort crib through wheel settings to find
possible Enigma keys.”

(U) In late 1942 Alan Turing began a series of
visits to America telling “M” more about Ultra
and the construction efforts on the latest British
Bombe.”® The two nations’ intelligence services
and the two Bombe projects became closer as
1942 ended. But Desch’s Bombe was an American
product.""?

4S} By the time he received adequate informa-
tion about Wynn-William’s work and that of
“Doc” Keen onhis four-wheel “Mammoth”
Bombe, Desch had his design relatively fixed.’*°
He was convinced that the automatic rewind fea-
ture was essential, and he did not wish to halt his
work while the British proved that all “hit” circuit
tests could be done without rewinding the wheels.
He was convinced that his steel shafts would be
more reliable than belt drives and that menu set-
ting should be done with a set of switches rather
than clusters of hand-inserted Jones plugs.

(U) Desch and his NCR men and the young
engineers in John Howard’s “M” group took the
very heavy responsibility ofcreating a unique
machine and a path-breaking production line to
defeat the U-boats.’™

(U) Desch Takes Charge

(U) Assoon ashis_ general design was
approved inSeptember 1942, Desch began to
refine his ideas and looked forward to immedi-
ately building a prototype. ** Atthe same time,
the old engineering group from MIT was ordered
to put the other OP-20-G machine projects on
hold until the critical Bombes were ready.
Financing was not aproblem, and the second
American Bombe project, which atone point
would employ over 1,000 manufacturing work-
ers, received the highest priorities for personnel
and material. The Bombe project had its own
building in Dayton with armed Marines and spe-

TOR SECRETICOMINTUREL—TO-USA-AUS.-GAN-CBRAND-NZEHE—

cial secret rooms to manufacture and use the
Bombes.

(U) Wenger Gets His Organization

(U) The Bombe was soimportant that the
Bureau of Ships had to grant all the wishes of
Wenger, Engstrom, and Desch. OP-20-G was
able toconvince the Bureau tocreate anew
administrative organization for all the high-speed
machine projects: the Naval Computing Machine
Laboratory (NCML) at Dayton, Ohio. In formal
terms the Bureau’s NCML was the boss of the
Dayton work, but byearly 1943 it was really a
support organization for OP-20-G’s group of
engineers and scientists.

(U) The “M” group was also gaining power.
The country’s best mathematicians, physicists,
and engineers were brought into OP-20-GM.
That allowed Engstrom to have a self-contained
machine development group that easily chal-
lenged the Bureau’s technical authority. Of
importance tothe nature ofthe postwar RAM
program, the “M” engineers were integrated with
the NCR workforce. That gave the machine
designers the freedom to merge research and pro-
duction and, combined with the virtual takeover
of NCR, it allowed Wenger a constant interaction
with and power over the manufacturing process.

(VU) Of Tires and Transmissions and a
Disappearing Laboratory

(U) Such freedom and the massive resources
the navy was willing to pour into Desch’s project
were not enough tosustain the hopes of
September and October 1942, however. At the
opening of 1943 a prototype of his Bombe had not
been assembled, and there were serious questions
about the practicality of the components that had
been constructed. '*3 The rejection of the plan for
anelectronic machine and the reversion to the
electromechanical technology ofthe British
Bombes had not led to the easy solutions “G” had

Page 105
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA- AUS, CAN GBR AND-NZEDH

expected. The Bombe and Rapid Machine proj-
ects were in trouble again.

~S//5B Joseph Desch’s first designs had
called for a Bombe that was a close analog of the
Enigma, but itwas tobe avery, very fast one.
There were to be more than twenty sets of four
wheels each ina Bombe. Each of the four wheels
was tobe ofthe same size and was tobe con-
structed out of typical materials ofthe era. The
Bombe’s commutators were to be made of either
hard rubber or Bakelite, standard insulated hous-
ings of the 1940s.

(U) Inserted within the inner face of those
wheels were rather large copper contact bars. Joe
Desch knew he would have to make them of spe-
cial lengths and shapes to prevent spurious elec-
trical contacts from being registered as “hits.”

S44SB The fastest of the four wheels was to
spin around more than sixty times a second. That
rate of speed seemed essential. And also essential
was the complex gearing that would be required
to pace the movement ofthe slower commuta-
tors. The gearing requirements included the diffi-
cult-to-machine-and-maintain Geneva gears and
astepping control system that reminded one
experienced engineer ofthe complexity of the
recently invented automatic transmissions for
automobiles. 4

57/56 Although achallenge, the group at
NCR had few doubts about creating the Bombe.
September’s optimism about such mechanical
and electrical parts did not last long, however.
The first serious disappointment came quite
soon. It was found that the commutators could
not tolerate such high speeds. The fast wheels
were blowing apart. The problem could not be
overcome, Desch concluded, so he significantly
altered the design of the Bombe.

S4H85h ByDecember’ heenvisioned a

machine that would have two small “fast” wheels.
The smaller wheels, he hoped, would rotate at

Page 106

least at1,800 rpm without disintegrating. Soon
he had to admit to other problems. He warned
Engstrom that the commutators might not be
interchangeable from Bombe to Bombe.

Production difficulties might cause something
worse. The commutators, Desch said, might have
to be permanently attached on each spindle. 5

(ES/48B The decision to create a Bombe with
two fast wheels created near panic in
Washington. Since any ofthe Enigma wheels
might be assigned the “fast” position, each of the
eight known Enigma commutators would have to
be cloned bytwo, not one Bombe commutator.
Howard Engstrom let Desch know inthe
strongest terms that he disapproved ofthe two-
wheel design. It would create a logistics night-
mare, wrote Engstrom. More than 40,000 or
50,000 ofthe expensive commutators would
have tobe immediately stockpiled and made
available for use. Ifthe Germans altered the
wiring ontheir wheels or added new ones, no
manufacturer could respond quickly enough to
produce the new wheels.?”°

(U) Desch promised that he would do his best
to make the wheels interchangeable from Bombe
to Bombe, but hecould not guarantee that he
could produce a Bombe of any significant speed
without the dual fast wheel feature.

€F3745B Then a very great gamble was made.
Washington declared that a solution be found.
The American Bombe would have only one size
wheel! Desch and his men had their orders, but
no solutions. They began anintensive search.
Their reward was disappointment. Prototype
after prototype kept disintegrating when put at
the high-speed position even when the revolu-
tions per minute were reduced to less than half
than originally planned.

S}/S-The answer eluded everyone. It was
not until some of the young officers stationed at
NCR realized the similarities between the com-
mutator’s problems and those of automobile tires

TOR-SECRET/COMATIREL—+O-UGA,AUS-CAN CBR AND NZCIAT~
—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS;CAN-GBR AND NEE

that there was a glimpse of hope. How were tires
able tohold together during auto races? The
answer seemed to lie in a new product, rayon. The
officers learned that webs constructed from it
were being used to reinforce new types of rubber
tires.

€P574/SB There were visits to local tire compa-
nies and some tests. The situation appeared
hopeful, but no one was sure that the experiments
could be translated into amass production sys-
tem for the commutators. **”

GES}/5B Because they had no choice, Desch’s
team went ahead with the rest of the Bombe proj-
ect while they waited for word about the commu-
tators. As they did, they confronted another prob-
lem whose solution was also tied to the automo-
bile industry.

CES+/SH The gearing system for the Bombe
proved more complex and temperamental than
expected. No one seemed able to correctly align
the components. Finally, the more senior engi-
neers asked some of the younger men in Dayton if
they had any experiences with gearboxes. One,
whose engineer father had worked for Tom
Edison, had some hands-on experience with the
new automatic transmissions. When he exam-
ined the Bombes, he saw much that related to his
previous experience. He volunteered totry to
solve the gear assembly problems.’”*

CGs448b There was another important prob-
lem with the Bombes that almost halted develop-
ment. Desch had rejected the idea for a fully elec-
tronic bombe, but had no alternative other than
to rely upon electronics for many parts of his 1942
device.

CS#/SH) Desch’s September design suggested
aneed for perhaps as many as 1,500 tubes in rel-
atively complex circuits. The fast diagonal board
to test for stecker settings might call for over

1,000 tubes. Given the size of tubes ofthe early
1940s and the heat they generated, an alternative
to off-the-shelf technology had tobe found.
Desch’s past experience led him to believe that
small multipurpose tubes might be created. He
made some attempts torefine his previous
designs, but his many other responsibilities
pulled him away from the needed solution. He
had to have help. Fortunately, the NCR project
had such high priority and such vast resources
that one of the nation’s leading tube experts could
besummoned toOhio and allowed to order
everything he needed to create an advanced labo-
ratory. His work proved successful, and he was
able to deliver the specifications to manufacturers
for the special tube. It was a tiny four-in-one tube
that became the basis for the ultra-fast diagonal
board. It would be produced in carload lots, and it
reduced the number of separate tubes inthe
Bombes to fewer than 500.’*?

(U) While the “G” group waited for the solu-
tions to the commutator, gearing, and tube prob-
lems, they faced a very chilling possibility. For a
time, some in “M” worried that their opportunity
had been lost because GC&CS was able to reenter
the Atlantic U-boat system atthe beginning of
1943 without the use of any four-wheel Bombes.
The reentry came through the capture of docu-
ments from a U-boat and the discovery of some
very sloppy procedures on the Shark network. As
a consequence, the British were able to read the
four-wheel Enigma messages using their old
Bombes and hand techniques.

(U) But the British and the Americans soon
realized how temporary the new solution was. As
the spring U-boat offensive opened, the Germans
changed some oftheir codes and tightened up
their procedures so that the Allies were again shut
out ofthe submarine systems. They remained
blind for afrightening ten days during what
became the worst month in the history of the bat-
tle of the Atlantic.

Page 107
FOR-SECRETICOMINTHREL—-TO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBIRAND NZDT —

(U) Saving the American Bombe

(U) Atleast three months before that ghastly
March 1943 U-boat slaughter, OP-20-G realized
that Desch’s machine was inserious trouble.
Pressure was put onthe staff atNCR to work
overtime. Joe Desch was told to drop his many
other electronics projects for the NDRC,
Aberdeen, and the army. And the navy went over
the head of the new president of NCR and wrote
directly to Colonel Deeds to make sure that NCR
gave the Bombe project all it needed. Under prod-
ding from the Chief of Naval Operations, Deeds
quickly ordered Dayton to devote less time to its
other and more profitable war work and give the
Bombe all of its attention.**°

T3456 The first design for the pilot model of
the Bombe was submitted in January. Joe Desch
and John Howard responded to British sugges-
tions and incorporated them ina second design
even as they rushed to construct the first proto-
type. But the men in Dayton were not keeping
pace with the war.“ As the great Atlantic battle
began in March, all that had emerged from some
seven months of work were two wheezy prototype
machines.

CES44SD Their commutator racks sat on saw-
horses, and their other components were scat-
tered around the workroom, connected by scores
of wires that were soaked with the oil that flowed
out of their drive shafts’ housings. Their commu-
tators continued their obstinacy, and the crew of
engineers endured repetitions of lowering the fast
wheels’ “rpm,” then having to dodge their frag-
ments as they splintered. Noone was sure that
the two models, Adam and Eve, would prove
themselves and serve astest beds for the vital
production machines. Nonetheless, Washington
decided it could wait no longer and in early April
Desch committed to a final design for the produc-
tion version of the American Bombe although he
was not sure that it would work.”

Page 108

(U) There was progress at Dayton during
April and May, but no machines! The group at
NCR could not even tempt the two Bombe proto-
types to run for more than a few inadequate min-
utes. Fortunately, escort carriers, airborne radar,
acentral command center for subhunting (the
Tenth Fleet), and changes in the once vulnerable
Allied convoy codes began to bring the Atlantic
under control. Enigma cracking played its part,
but not through the promised American techno-
logical wonders, the Bombes.

(U) A Bombe Too Late

(U) Order was restored in the Atlantic before
the first American Bombe was even put to its
tests. The problems inthe Atlantic and the com-
ing European offensives called for another read-
justment in the rules for cooperation in the intel-
ligence field. The BRUSA agreement made the
United States Army a partner in the Ultra Secret,
but avery junior one. OP-20-G and the United
States Army again agreed tofocus onthe
Japanese problems and to allow GC&CS to deter-
mine what the Americans would do or would not
do against the Enigma and Fish systems.

(U) Asthe mid-May 1943 negotiations came
toa close, Joseph Wenger remained unsure of
OP-20-G’s future. Even if “G” was too late to be
the savior of the Atlantic, there was still much to
do to counter the U-boats. The German Army, Air
Force, rocket development team, and police agen-
cies showed signs of changing over to four-wheel
Enigmas. And, inthe systems continuing to use
the three-wheel machines, anticipated alterations
in procedures and inthe use oftheir plugboards
threatened another round of crises. Ifthe
American Bombes could be made to work, they
still might play a significant role.

(U) Inlate May Wenger ordered Desch to
allow the two temperamental prototypes to be
used on messages sent from Washington. The
results were tobe forwarded tothe British as
TORSECRETICOMNTIREL-FOUEA-AUE-CAN-GBR-AND-NZEHIA

examples of American  abilities."** Howard
Engstrom, in charge of the new Enigma message
work, felt defeated when Adam and Eve refused
to run for more than a few hours without spurting
oil or developing incurable cases of faulty electri-
cal contacts.**#

(UV) A Program Based on Another
Technological Bet

(U) Adam and Eve continued their tantrums
as June approached, * and the production model
was yet tobe assembled. The tension mounted
when it was learned that as Dayton again faltered,
Britain completed its first four-wheel Bombe, put
its first tape and electronic Robinson to use, and
began the construction of the advanced electron-
ic COLOSSUS. *°

(U) Adam and Eve, the prototypes, were in
too much trouble and were too vital to working
out critical technical problems to be used by the
cryptanalysts in Washington. Desch’s crew and
Howard’s NCML engineers put inlonger hours
using Adam and Eve to unravel the problems with
the parts for the production machines. The com-
mutators were reworked and the drive-mecha-
nisms altered.’*” By mid-June there were hopes
that all the problems had been conquered.

(U) However, the production crew had still
not released the first two copies ofthe final
model, Cain and Abel. Desch pushed his people
harder, and the NCR factory began to assemble
components atan even faster pace. They could
only hope the parts would function when put
together in the Bombe.

(U) July 26: a Day of Defeat

(U) It took Joe Desch another month to send
the first two production models tothe test
floor.’#* Then he was able to have thirteen more
of the new Bombes assembled by the last week of
July, but none would work!’%? July 26, 1943, was
acritical day in the history of OP-20-G and the

FOR-SEGRETIGOMINFHREL-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR AND NZDT

NCML. At the very last minute, Desch made a dis-
covery that revived hope. Running the Bombe’s
Bakelite code wheels at extreme speeds was again
causing invisible distortions leading to false elec-
trical contacts. Desch predicted that careful stor-
age, handling, and refurbishing would solve the
problem.“° Apparently, Desch had replaced the
small fast wheel on the first prototypes with ones
the same size asthe others to please Engstrom.
Again, his judgment was trusted. The wheels were
reworked and production was resumed based on
his hope that the last-minute modifications
would provide a permanent cure.

(U) A Victory, a Bit Too Late

(U) Despite all the false starts, delays and
problems, Desch built one of the most complex
machines in the world. The 1943 Dayton Bombe
was a seven-foot-high, eight-foot-long, two-foot-
wide and 5,000-pound marvel. It housed sixteen
four-wheel sets of Enigma analogs and the
Welchman diagonal board. Its sixty-four double-
Enigma wheel commutators each contained 104
contact points, which had to be perfectly aligned
when they touched the copper and silver sensing
brushes. Such alignment and synchronization
were difficult to achieve, especially for the fast
wheel. The achievement was more remarkable
because Desch was able to keep his promise of
making the commutators interchangeable.

(U) There had been some compromises in
order to convince the machine to work. It was
much slower than hoped for. Fewer than 2,000
revolutions a minute had to be accepted because
even the reinforced commutators could not stand
upto higher speed. And running the Bombe’s
main shaft even at the lower “rpm” without creat-
ing the sparks and short circuits that ruined a test
continued to be a problem.

(TS//SD It was quite embarrassing to have
had to install a conduit system under the machine
to catch the oil that was sprayed on the main shaft
to keep itfrom overheating. And the engineers

Page 109
FOP-SEGRETHIGOMINFIREE-TO-UGA AUS, CAN; CBR ANE-NZEI

did not like the idea of having to pour a quart or
so of oil into the machines every day."”

(E8445) There had been some other compro-
mises. The NCR devices did not incorporate a
means of producing irregular stepping ofthe
slower wheels, and the summer 1943 Bombes
were not the compact three complete units-per-
frame devices Desch had sketched in the previous
year. Trying to balance the engineering demands
with cryptologic power had led tothe Bombes
being composed of sixteen, not twenty, units, and
having only one Bombe per frame.

€FS7/51) Sixteen “Enigmas,” one diagonal
board, and fewer testing circuits made the
American Bombes much less discriminating than
the new British ones (thirty-six Enigmas and two
boards); but Desch’s Bombes were much more
reliable and needed remarkably little mainte-
nance once they were broken in.“**

(F545) Although Desch’s model was based
onthe logic, parallel architecture, and hardware

ofthe British Bombe, his machine was an origi-
nal. The truly distinctive part of Desch’s machine
was its electronics.

(#84451) He did not rely upon the designs of
the new Keen Bombe, the Mammoth, nor did he
copy Wynn-Williams’ ideas."4*

(FSASD) Although Wynn-Williams’ partially
electronic machine, the Cobra, was more sophis-
ticated in some ways than Desch’s, Desch’s was
more effective. Wynn-Williams’ device printed
solutions on the fly, but it proved somewhat unre-
liable. Desch’s Bombe also proved more trustwor-
thy than Keen’s latest electromechanical one.“

(464468 Desch was forced to bow to some
other technological limits since his Bombes con-
tained sixteen not twenty-four (or, like the British
machines, over thirty) Enigma analogs. Each of
the sixteen units was housed in a separate rack,
which took up as much space asthe three-per-
rack configuration that had been the goal in
September 1942.

(F848) Although = the

 

 

 

American Bombes did their
jobs, they could not use long
and discriminating cribs of
more than sixteen letters, as
could the British devices.
Desch had balanced his under-
standing of the power of short
cribs against the mechanical
difficulties ofdriving a large
number of commutators. ‘*

(FS4H4SB The information
about cribs and menus that
had been revealed after
October 1942 also helped
Desch decide against attempt-
ing to incorporate a helpful but
challenging feature: automatic

 

 

(See Borbe

Page 110

slow-wheel turnover. Desch
did not build a means of kick-

FOR-SECRETICOMING Ril TO-USA-AUS CAM GRRAND.MZLIX4..
—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TC-USA-AUS-CAN-OBROANE NZL

ing the slower wheels to a new position relative to
its mates after a faster wheel had completed a full
revolution. Relying upon the probabilities that
hits could be discovered before the fast wheel
reached the point where the next wheel should be
pushed ahead one or more letters, hand-setting of
displacements during the commutator setup, and
the use ofa two-part menu allowed the Bombe
design to remain manageable. 4°

€F54/55 However, this meant that when
“hoppity” menus (fast-wheel turnover positions
known) were run, the Bombe operators had to
stop the machines, then reset wheel positions by
hand and restart the Bombe.”

(UT) Ignorant No More

(U) However, with the help of his electronic
memory system and the maturation of “G’s”
Enigma cryptanalytic skills, Desch came very
close to achieving all the hopes for the American
Bombe.

CS+4SH Because of his engineering skills and
the use of strong menus, the NCR Bombe took
twenty, not fifty, nor the worst case, 380 minutes,
for arun. Amajor reason was that the British
cryptanalysts (and later “G’s” experts) were able
to supply menus that produced onthe average
five- orso prints or “stories” per run — not
40,000." The menus eliminated so many of the
possibilities that the Bombes stopped, rewound,
and restarted very infrequently. That saved sig-
nificant amounts of time.

45455 In terms of raw speed, Desch’s 1943
machine was 200 times faster than the Polish
Bomba, atleast twenty times faster than the
Turing Bombe, and at least thirty percent faster
than Britain’s 1943 four-wheel Bombe.“? His
machine was able torun either three-or four-
wheel tests.

CFS+74SH As important for the success of the
NCR Bombes were the menus for them.

—“FOP-SGEGRETIGOMNFEREL-FG-US AAU E-GAN-GER-AND-NZLI—

Unfortunately, it took the Americans many, many
additional months before they learned how to
consistently supply “strong” menus. Fortunately,
by late summer 1943 the British were willing to
wire cribs and other Bombe instructions directly
to “G’s” Washington headquarters. They forward-
edthem assoon asthey located the reencode-
ments and other German procedural errors that
were allowing them into the Shark system.

(LZ) The Bombes at Work

(U) Desch’s manufacturing techniques gained
the respect of the once skeptical British. By mid-
November Washington had over fifty bombes in
operation and thirty more onsite. * The
American navy finally began to be a truly produc-
tive Ultra member. By the end of the year, the first
contract was completed,** and Engstrom began
to turn his crews to other technical and cryptana-
lytic problems.

(U) Although the second American Bombe
project, from the first investigations tothe last
delivery, took almost a year longer than expected,
Desch and OP-20-G received applause, not criti-
cism, inlate 1943.5 Asa _ result of Dayton’s
achievement, the British found it impossible to
continue on with acondescending attitude. The
Americans soon became the guardians of the U-
boat work, and Britain felt confident enough to
concentrate on the Fish system and German army
traffic.'54 From mid-1943 to the end ofthe war,
M4 was open to America and Britain.

(U) But the American Bombes were born a bit
too late. Bythe time the Washington center
received its machines, the four-wheel U-boat traf-
fic was light.

CFS47S4) Or at least the British thought so.
They complained that the Americans were run-
ning their precious Bombes against low-priority
messages and were using menus that were highly
unlikely to produce a break. They more than sug-
gested that Engstrom should agree toa true

Page 111
—TFOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL-TO USA, AUS; CAN; GBR AND NZLIX1

“sharing” of Bombe resources. They wanted the
American navy torun important German air
force and army problems and to help with the
“European” part of the war.*°

€F54/55- Productive work was found for the
more than one hundred American machines. The
navy’s men soon began the analysis of other
German Enigma systems. Although somewhat
worried about breaching the agreement with
Friedman’s American army group, OP-20-G took
on much German three-wheel air force work.*”

(8) By autumn 1944, 60 percent of the navy’s
Bombe time was devoted to German air force and
army problems as presented bythe British.’*
OP-20-G contributed more tothe non-naval
work. After rejecting a British plea to quickly con-
struct another fifty Bombes and complaining that
England had not contributed enough to the four-
wheel effort, NCR built another two dozen
Bombes. The new machines were somewhat more
sophisticated than the first version.”*? Britain did
place more and more responsibility for four-
wheel bombes on the Americans, even announc-
ing at one point that Keen would return to build-
ing three-wheel machines. The second series of
American Bombes had a“double input” feature
that eliminated more false hits.

(U) In addition toconstructing the new
Bombes, NCR built aseries of attachments for
them and the older machines. As well, they put
into use other devices needed to automate the
final steps in identifying Enigma keys.

(4848) An Enigma attack was aimed at dis-
covering seven things about an Enigma setup: 160

1. Rotor wiring

2. Reflector plugging

3. Stecker setting

4. Rotor order

5. Window setting (starting point)
6. Ring or core setting

7. Notch pattern (turnovers)

Page 112

CFSA+8B-Given a strong crib of about sixteen
letters, knowledge ofthe rotor wiring, a correct
guess asto the reflector’s plugging and a large
number of Bombes, analysts could expect to get
back some very good indications ofthe stecker
setting, the rotor order, and some indirect help on
the window setting, the ring setting, and the
notch pattern. The Bombe was a relatively strong
and quick means for asolution. But it needed
some help.

(U) More to It Than the Bombe

(U) The Bombe was a powerful anti-Enigma
tool, but by itself could not yield all that needed to
be known about Enigma settings. Onthe other
hand, it was, insome contexts, anexample of
overkill. When several elements ofan Enigma
setting were already known, other machines were
much more efficient.”

C&S) For example, Hypo, the microfilm
machine that had been constructed so that a pure
statistical attack could be mounted against the
Enigma, was called into service as a “locator.”

(48445B When the Bombes had done their
jobs and the rotor order and wiring, the stecker,
and the Uncle Walter were known, Hypo was
used to find the window setting through a letter
frequency test.°* Hypo helped in certain tough
cases, but it took a great deal of time. Developing
its film took forty minutes, and a “three-wheel”
Hypo test took seventy minutes. And Hypo
demanded humidity- and _ light-controlled
rooms. 3

(6//SB The navy group at NCR found a faster
way tohandle such tasks. They built electrical
attachments for the Bombes. These “Grenades”
were large panels containing pluggable switch
banks, which were used to control the Bombes.
Their most frequent applications called for only a
few of the sixteen banks on a Bombe and ran very

TOP-SECRETICONINTHREL-TCUSA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-AND NZL
TOR SECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-USA-AUE-GAM -GBRAND-NZEINT—

quickly. In most instances aGrenade run took
fifty seconds.*®4

€FS4/SH There were many varieties of
Grenades. One ofthe firsts was for the window
settings when the other Enigma crypto-variables
were known. Mrs. Driscoll had outlined the logic
for the first American Grenade to John Howard a
month before the Bombe project had been
approved inSeptember 1942. He implemented
those ideas inthe technology ofthe Bombes as
well as in the film machines."

(E8448) The Driscoll-Howard Standard
Grenades appeared as soon as the Bombes came
into operation. They were agreat help because
they reduced the effort needed to identify the
window settings for succeeding messages once
the Bombes had found the daily key. With the
known daily key, all that was needed was a short
four- or five-letter crib.

GS4HSb The usefulness ofthe Standard
Grenades was increased when “G” discovered
how to put them to exploiting German errors
such as selecting wheel orders in a “Cilly” or non-
random way. The Standard was also helpful in
discovering why certain messages would not yield
tothe regular Bombe attack. The Grenades
became a major way of exploring such “dud” mes-
sages.’© The Standard became a necessity at “G,”
and one was built into each of the second, 1944,
models of the Bombes. ©

(ES4AS) Once “G’s” men had the opportunity,
they began tobuild aseries of additional
Grenades; each provided an efficient solution to a
particular Enigma problem, and each extended
the power of the Bombes.

€FS445H The Parallel Grenade allowed four
short cribs to be used simultaneously to find the
window settings. The Drag Grenade went further.
Ittested the four cribs, position by position,
against a sixteen-letter cipher text. Its sister, the
Polygrenade, was more powerful. It dragged the

FOP-SECREHIGOMIFHIREL-FO-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBRORND-NZE—

crib twenty-six positions ata time. The simpler
Jones Dudbuster imitated the large paper cata-
logs by dragging acommon word such as “eins”
through the text.’°*

(F545; The Sliding Grenades expanded the
Bombe’s power by handling those Enigmas with
rotating reflector wheels. The Pluggable-Series
Grenade was quite clever; itfound the wheel
order and ring setting for traffic produced using a
double indicator. "©

(F8/4S1) The most impressive ofthe
Grenades was the Universal Plugboard. It was so
flexible that it was used to explore many different
ideas. Its main operational use was totry upto
twenty-six cribs over thirteen letters — quite an
imaginative use of plugs and wires.

<457+/59) Some of the Grenades were asked to
solve more complex problems. To do so they used
all of a Bombe ortwo Bombes lashed together.
The Query found settings from the indicators on
the messages. The Cilly automated the exploita-
tion of nonrandom selection of part of a message
setting.*”°

(FS/4SB Electronic devices were also used to
make the Bombes more effective. Tube circuits
were added to the first (N530) Bombes to com-
pensate for weak menus that were producing too
many stops. That Self-Detector was aset of the
special four-in-one tubes attached to the original
diagonal board. It suppressed stops that did not
have aparticular diagonal board connection: a
letter connected to itself, that is, unsteckered.
Statistical analyses had shown that it was very
unlikely that astop without such a connection
would lead to the unraveling of an Enigma key.’”

(FS#/5) The electronic Squelcher incorporat-
ed a more general test to eliminate stops unlikely
to produce key. It was a substitute for the original
electronic amplifier system in the N530 Bombes.
It was conceived when the worries about weak
menus were intense. Once the Americans learned

Page 113
—FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS- CAN GBRAND NEE —

the tricks of menu building, they decided that
only a few of their old Bombes needed to have the
Squelchers, *”

(U) The success of Grenades and Squelcher
circuits were only two ofthe indicators that
Engstrom’s group was beginning to overcome the
chaos of 1942 and early 1943. By the fall of 1943
things were going much, much better for
Wenger's dreams for a permanent RAM program.
In addition to the Bombes, OP-20-G finally began
to receive the Gray-NCR and the Eastman
machines. The first of the new Bush Comparators
was put into operation in September. The new
Comparator had asomewhat rocky career, how-
ever. When it arrived in Washington, it had sev-
eral flaws, including the incompatibility of its
major components; incorrect specifications had
been sent to the contractors. It also proved to be
much slower than desired. But the complaints
about the machine’s failings were turned to “M’s”
advantage. The critics were assured that placing
the next developments in the hands of the OP-20-
GNCML group would prevent such mistakes.‘
The failings of Eastman-Kodak’s devices were
also used as arguments for an expansion of “G's”
own research and development.’”* All in all, by
January 1944, OP-20-G’s RAM group seemed
vindicated and ready to return to the extension of
the microfilm and digital electronic technologies.
Some hoped there would be time to search for a
general-purpose cryptanalytic machine, one that
went beyond the Bush Comparator.

Notes

1.(U) NSA Bombe File, U.S. Navy OP-20-G/OP-
20-2, Memo to Station X, “Decision regarding future E
policy,” app. May 1942.

2. (U) Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1982), 51.

3. (FS44H) Onthe Enigma, (TS//SD NSA CCH
Series XII Z,(S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of
Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The
American Attack onthe German Naval Ciphers,”
October 1944. [sic].

Page 114

4. (F84458 NSA AHA 17580, Telford Taylor to
Clarke and Corderman, “Early E. History,” 10.

5.(TS77SD NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. (T44*SH- NSA CCH “P”
Collection Box CCo67, RIP 608, CITS Paper TS-10/E-
6,“Enigma Series Vol. 6, Duenna,” CNC-OP-20,
January 1946.

6.tF8 NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945,” 12. (S} NSA
AHA ACC 35701, “German Communications,” 11
October 1943.

7.(U) Jean Stengers, “La guerre des messages
codes, 1930-1045” L’Historie , 31 (1981): 19-31. Cipher
A. Deavours, and Louis Kruh, Machine Cryptography
and Modern Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech
House, 1985), 117.

8.TR.NSA AHA ACC 35701, “German Communi-
cations,” 11 October 1943.

9.(F8445) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 175.
Thomas Parrish, The Ultra Americans: The United
States’ Role in Breaking the Nazi Code (New York:
Stein & Day, 1987), 49. Cipher A. Deavours, and Louis
Kruh, Machine Cryptography and Modern
Cryptanalysis (Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985),
117. £F8) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P, Mahon, “The
History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.” (TS//SD) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, GCCS, “OP-20-G Contribution.”

10. (U) Wladyslaw Kozaczuk, Enigma (Frederick,
Md.: University Publications of America, 1984). Jean
Stengers, “Enigma, the French, the Poles and the
British, 1931-1940,” in Christopher Andrew and David
Dilks (ed.), The Missing Dimension (London, 1984).
Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 170-175.

11. (FS4485 NSA AHA 17580, Telford Taylor to
Clarke and Corderman, “Early E. History.”

12. (U) Andrew Hodges, Alam Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 176.
Some of the Scandinavian nations may have had spo-
radic successes against Enigma and Fish, which they
shared with Britain. But the true burden had to be car-
ried by the British. Cryptologia, 12 (1988): 39, review
of W. M.Carlgren, Svensk Underrattelsetjanst 1939-
45, (Stockholm, 1985).

TLOR_SECRETICOMINTI Rit FO-VEA-AUG,GAN-GERANB-NZEI—
TOR SECRETUCOMINTHUREL—TO-USA-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLHK4—

13. &S) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A.P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.”

14. (U) Alan Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983). A.G.
Denniston, “The Government Code and Cypher School
between the Wars,” Intelligence and National
Security, 1 (1986): 48-69. Christopher Andrew, Her
Majesty's Secret Service: The Making of the British
Intelligence Community (New York: Penguin, 1987).

15. (U) Martin Campbell-Kelly, IC L: A Business
and Technical History (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1989), 118. Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story:
Breaking the Enigma Codes (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1982), 295. Cipher A.Deavours and Louis Kruh,
Machine Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis
(Dedham, Mass.: Artech House, 1985), 119, 124.

16. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1991), 141. Andrew Hodges, Alan
Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1983), 233. At one point Turing may have considered
building afilm machine for the method rather than
using punched overlay sheets. It would have speeded
the search or “coincidences” asdid Bush’s machine.
But note that for Banburismus to be effective, captures
of tables of some of the Enigma settings were vital. In
1938, the British used another statistical test called
SAGA. It also appears to be the kind of approach used
by Mrs. Driscoll in America.

17. (8) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight,” 1939-1945.”

18. (BQ) Scritching looked for contradictions pro-
duced by assumption, concerning the settings ofa
cipher machine. It reduced the number of possibilities
that have to be examined. (F544SQ CCH Series XII Z,
“Army-Navy, Descriptive Dictionary of Cryptologic
Terms,” ASA February, 1947.

19. (FSA4SJ) NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & C.S.
Naval SIGINT. Vol. III, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

20. (FS44ASD) NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & C.S.
Naval SIGINT. Vol. III, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

21. (S412) NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & CS.
Naval SIGINT. Vol. HI, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

—FOP-SECRETFHCOMINTHREETFO-USA, AUS AN-OBROANB-NZEE—

22. ES) On other statistical methods, TES)NSA
CCH Series IV, 7.20, A. P. Mahon, “The History of Hut
Eight, 1939-1945.”

23. (FS) Avery readable and complete description
of the British Bombe is found in NSA CCH Series XII
Z, “The General Cryptanalytic Branch.”

24. (PS) NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.”

25. (8&8) NSA CCH Series [V.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945,” 28.

26. (FS4/SI) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 176.
Gordon Welchman, The Hut Six Story: Breaking the
Enigma Codes (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982), 295.
TTS¥4SL_ NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & C.S. Naval
SIGINT. Vol. HI, German Cryptographic Systems and
Their Solution.”

27. (U) Such commutator systems had been used
in electrical timing instruments, but Keen did truly
creative work.

28. (P5445 NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & CS.
Naval SIGINT. Vol. III, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

29. (FSA) Martin Campbell-Kelly, TC L:A
Business and Technical History (Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1989), 119. CPS4¢SQ NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C.
& C.S. Naval SIGINT. Vol. III, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

30. (U) There are some different interpretations in
Bradley F.Smith’s, The Codebreaker’s War: The
Ultra-Magic-Deals (Novato: Presidio Press, 1993).
Because of my evidence I remain convinced, for exam-
ple, that the Americans took the lead in their Bombe
program and that they intended to produce more than
300 machines. See Smith, 247. 26. F.H. Hinsley,
British Intelligence in the Second World War, Volume
IT (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 747.

31. (U) Jurgen Rohwer, The Critical Convoy Battle
of March 1943 (London: Ian Allan, 1977), 240. Nigel
West, GCHQ, the Secret Wireless War, 1900-86
(London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1986), 201, 210.
F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World
War, vol. III, Part I, (1984), 52.

32. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert L, Benson,
“The Origin of U.S. British Communications:
Intelligence Cooperation (1940-41),” NSA Cryptologic

Page 115
—FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-UG AAG AN-OBR-AND-NZL-

Spectrum, 4 (Spring 1944): 5-8. (S) NSA CCH Series II
Z, “History of GET (TUNNY) Research.”

33. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 017. Louis Kruh, “British-
American Cryptanalytic Cooperation and an
Unprecedented Admission by Winston Churchill,”
Cryptologia, 13 (1989): 123-134. Nigel West, GCHQ,
201. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second
World War, Vol. 1 (London: Her Majesty's Stationery
Office, 1979), 155. NSA RG457, SRH-197, “U. 8. Navy
Communications Intelligence, Organization, Liaison
and Collaboration, 1941-45.” But both Britain and the
Dutch provided the Americans with intelligence and
cryptanalytic help on Japanese systems earlier than
previously thought. See Rear Admiral Edwin T.
Layton, And I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway:
Breaking the Secrets (New York: William Morrow,
1985), 206. John W. M. Chapman, “Pearl Harbor: The
Anglo-Australian Dimension,” Intelligence and
National Security I( 1989), 451-481. James
Rusbridger and Eric Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor
(New York: Summit Books, 1991).

34. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-141, “Papers from the
Personal Files of Alfred McCormick, Pari 2, March 4,
1944,” “Memorandum for Genera! Bissel, Army-Navy
Agreement Regarding Ultra.” NARA RG457, SRH 152,
“Historical Review of OP-20-G.

35. $8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert L. Benson,
“The Origin of U.S. British Communications
Intelligence Cooperation (1940-41),” NSA Cryptologic
Spectrum 4 (Spring 1944), 5-8.

36. TTSSD Laurance Safford, “Rhapsody in
Purple,” by Linda P.Tucker, Cryptologia, 6 (1981),
193-229, and 346-367. James Rusbridger and Eric
Nave, Betrayal at Pearl Harbor (New York: Summit
Books, 1991). NSA SRH-391, “U.S. (T8443). NSA CCH
Series XII Z,“Washington ETraffic, Notes on
Correspondence” circa February 1942.

37. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 235-6. NARA RG457, SRH-
145, “Collection of Memoranda on Operations of SIS
Intercept Activities and Dissemination 1942-1945,”
“Report of the Technical Mission to England” April 11,
1941, 002-013. Greg Mellen (ed.), “Rhapsody in
Purple: A New History of Pearl Harbor by Dundas P.

Page 116

Tucker,” Cryptologia,6 (1981), 193-228. More bal-
anced views are in Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, And
I Was There: Pearl Harbor and Midway: Breaking
the Secrets (New York: William Morrow, 1985) and
Edward J.Drea, MacArthur’s Ultra (University of
Kansas Press, 1992). The Americans did not give
everything to the British, however. NARA RG298, Box
39, Memorandum of R. W. Sylvester to L. Terman,
April 11, 1942, tells Terman not to disclose any crypto-
logical work tothe British. And the Americans also
kept their very important SIGCUM enciphering
machine from the British during much of the war. See
NARA RG457, RMAoas, May 19,1944, Memorandum
for Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2 from Office of the Chief
Signal Officer.

38. (U} NARA RG457, SRH-270, “Army Navy FBI
COMINT Agreements of 1942” by Robert L. Benson,
and the very useful SRH-005, “Use of CX/MSS Ultra.”

39. (3 NSA CCH Series IV V 10.1, “Report of the
Technical Mission to England,” 11-4-1941.

40. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” and SRH-145, “Collection of
Memoranda on Operations of SIS Intercept Activities
and Dissemination 1942-1945,” ‘Report of the
Technical Mission to England’ April 11, 1941, 002-013.
TTS7#/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008) Navy Dept.,
Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G),
RIP 425, “The American Attack on the German Naval
Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic] TFS). NSA CCH R
Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-G-A, “American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,” 7 July 1944.

41. 8). Laurance Safford, “Rhapsody in Purple,” by
Dundas P. Tucker, Cryptologia , 6 (1981), 193-229, and
346-367. NARA, RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency,” 259, 261. There is some rea-
son to believe that Britain did pass on the ways to crack
the simpler 1940 German air force systems. NSA RAM
File, “Report toJ. N. Wenger, Capt. USN, Resume of
the Dayton, Ohio Activity During World War I,” and,
J.T. Pendergrass, “Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed
Digital Computing Machines,” -Fop-Geeret; 1946. TS)
NSA CCH Series IV V 10.1, “Report ofthe Technical
Mission to England,” 11-4-1941.

42. FFS} NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. YS). NSA CCH

FOR-SECRETHICOMINT/REL-TO-USA-AUG-GAN- GBR AND NALD
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA, AUS; CAN, GBR AND NZEIt ——@

Series IVV 10.1, “Report of the Technical Mission to
England,” 11-4-1941. (TS) NSA CCH R Collection, Box
CCo 66, OP-20-1 toOP-20-GY-A, 7July 1944,
“American Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems.”

43. (FS) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-
20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of German Naval
Systems,” 7 July 1944.

44. CES+/S5 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Washington
ETraffic, Notes on Correspondence” circa February
1942. (BS) NSA AHA.ACC 35701 “History of the
Bornbe Project,” 16 February 1946.”

45. ($8) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946.

46. (U) David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma (Boston:
Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 237.

47. (FS) NSA ARA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. (TS) NSA CCH
Series IV V 10.6, Chief Signal Officer, “A Chronology of
the Cooperation Between the SSA and the London
Office of GCCS,” 2 June 1946.

48. (TS44SD NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Washington
ETraffic, Notes on Correspondence” circa February
1942.

49. (8) Aninvaluable document on British-U. 5.
Army relationships, NARA RG457, SRH-005, “Use of
CX/MSS Ultra,” and of equal value, “History of 3-US,”
asin John Mendelsohn (ed.), Covert Warfare:
Intelligence, Counterintelligence & Military
Deception During the World War II Era (Garland,
1989). (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger to OP-20,
October 1,1942, “Collaboration of U. S.and British
radio Intelligence organizations on Japanese and
German projects.” Robert L.Benson, A History of
U.S. Communications Intelligence during World War
I: Policy and Administration , Center for Cryptologic
History, NSA, 1997.

50. (U) For the complaints by the American army’s
SIS, see NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency” Vol. II. 249-275.

51. (FS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. (TS) NSA CCH R
Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, “American
Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,” 7 July 1944.
(SL.NSA CCH series XII Z, Redman to OP-20, 2-28-
1942, “British not cooperating.”

—FOR-SEGRETICOMINFTIREL -FO-UGA-AUS-GAN-GBR-ANE-NeE

52. €FS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. (TS7/SB-NSA CCH
Series XII Z,(SI2Z008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of
Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The
American Attack onthe German Naval Ciphers,”
October 1944. [sic] 8S) NSA CCH R Collection, Box
CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of
German Naval Systems,” 7 July 1944.

53. (ES) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Travis to OP-20-
G,13 May 1942 — “Will Send Bombe to you in August
or September.”

54. (RQ.NSA CCH Series XII Z, Travis to OP-20-
G, 13 May 1942 — “Will Send Bombe to you in August
or September.”

55. @&S) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon. and Schuster, 1983), 191.
Laurance Safford, “Rhapsody in Purple,” by Dundas P.
Tucker, Cryptologia , 6 (1982), 216-17. NSA RAM File:
OP-20—G to GC&CS, July 7, 1942; OP20-G to OP-20
September 3,1942; J.N. Wenger to OP-20-GM,
August 6, 1942 “We wish to construct...”; and Wenger
to Ely, August 5, 1942; Engstrom to Meader re Turing
visit, January 5,1943. F.H. Hinsley, British
Intelligence inthe Second World War, Vol. 1,56.
Joseph Eachus, letter to the author, March 24, 1989.
“History of 3-US,” in John Mendelshon (ed.), Covert
Warfare (Garland, 1989), 010-012. (FS4¢SH) On the
continuing problems, it SIS, (RQ) NSA CCH Series IV
V10.6, Chief Signal Officer, “A Chronology of the
Cooperation Between the SSA and the London Office
of GCCS,” 2 June 1946. On the August protest by “G,”
YQ) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History ofthe Bombe
Project,” 16 February 1946. tS).NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Eachus to Wenger, 2 August 1942, “Full Wiring
Diagram on Way.” (8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger
to Op-20-GM, 6 August 1942, “Nature of E machine.”

56. (U) The group at Bletchley Park cracked the
new four-wheel system by December 1942. But the
break was not a pure cryptanalytic one. It depended
upon the capture of documents and the continued fail-
ure of the German system managers to follow basic
security procedures. David Kahn, Seizing the Enigma
(Boston: Houghton-Mifflin, 1991), 111.

57. (U) Laurance Safford, “Rhapsody in Purple,”
by Dundas P. Tucker, Cryptologia , 6 (1982), 193-2209,
and 346-367.

Page 117
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREE-TO-USA- AUS CAN-GBICAND NEE

58. (U} Even Britain waited what now seems too
long toorganize its research. Ronald Clark, Tizard
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965).

59. (U) The Coast Guard, which had been in
charge of decrypting rumrunner and other clandestine
traffic for years, had as its chief cryptanalyst William
Friedman’s wife. The clandestine system the Coast
Guard attacked must have been very simple compared
tothe Enigma.

60. (F545D NSA CCH Series XII Z, (812008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic] 51, 53.
€F8).NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP20-GY-A,
“American Cryptanalysis of German Naval Systems,”
7 July 1944.

61. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-306, “OP-20-G
Exploits and Commendations in World War HH” 016.
NSA RAM File, “Report to J. M. Wenger, Capt. USN,
Resume ofthe Dayton, Ohio Activity During World
War IL,” and J.T. Pendergrass, “Cryptanalytic Use of
High-Speed Digital Computing Machines,” Top Secret,
1946. (BR) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-
20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of German Naval
Systems,” 7 July 1944.

62. CFS4SD NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & CS.
Naval SIGINT. Vol. Ill, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.” GC&CS learned of the
possible introduction of the fourth wheel in May 1941
but did not get Wynn-Williams to work until very late
inthe year. His work proceeded ata very slow pace.
Doc Keen was not put to work tothink about a high-
speed Bombe for the four-wheel problem until late
spring 1942.

63. @Q NSA CCH Series XII Z, Hut 6, 4 October
1942, “Electronics for Bombe not Working.”

64. (U) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983),
225-7.

65. SSD Keen built several new versions of his
original Bombes. The new Mammoths and Jumbos
handled the standard three-and four-wheel Enigma
problems, while the Giants, Ogres and Twinns were,
like some American variants, commutator-based.
machines for special Enigma variation problems.
fFS48D NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & CS. Naval

Page 118

SIGINT. Vol. HI, German Cryptographic Systems and
Their Solution.” (F544) NSA AHA ACC 17738,
“E Operations ofthe GC&CS, list of machines,”
25 February 1945.

66. TES) Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 227.
(8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger, 18-9-
1942, “British four wheel design not progressing.” ®RQ)
NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon, “The History of
Hut Hight, 1939-1945. (8) NSA CCH Series XIII Z,
Hut 6,4 October 1942, “Electronics for Bombe not
Working.” C88) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-
49, “A Posteriori Remarks onthe Cryptanalytic
Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,” Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946.

67. (TH¥SD NSA Bombe File, “It is desired to con-
struct...” April 25, 1942, and August 5, 1942, Wenger to
Ely. 6F844SD NSA CCH Series XII Z,(S12008) Navy
Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-
20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the German
Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic].

68. (F548) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (812008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic] 51, 53.

69. &) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-
20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of German Naval
Systems,” 7July 1944. (RQ) NSA AHA 355209,

Friedman to Corderman, 29 March, 1944,
“Comparison of our “003” type of “Bombe” with the
rotary type.

70. (F8) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. (FSA48D Navy
Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT TS-10-E-5, “Bombe
Computations.” (K§) NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO
66, OP-20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of German
Naval Systems,” 7July 1044. (TS48Q NSA CCH P
series Box CCO 67, RIP 607 shows that when “G” did
finally incorporate a diagonal board it looked for hot-
points; the British looked for coldpoints.

71. (FQ. NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946. (F548) Navy
Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, RIP 607,
Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT Ts-10-E-5, “Bombe
Computations.”

FOR-GEGRETIGOMNTHREL-FO-UGA-AUG,-G/AN-GBR-ANE-NZEIIE-
—FOP-SEGRETICOMMFAHREL FO-U6A-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEH

72. TTS¥/SD. Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT
Ts-10-E-5, “Bombe Computations.”

73. TIS#ShNavy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT
Ts-10-E-5, “Bombe Computations.” (F348 NSA
CCH Series XII Z(S12008) Navy Dept., Office of Chief
of Naval Operations, DNC (OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The
American Attack onthe German Naval Ciphers,”
October 1944. [sic] 51-3. (BS) NSA CCH R Collection,
Box CCO 66, OP-20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis
of German Naval Systems,” 7 July 1944.

74. (U} NSA RAM File, “Decision Regarding
Future E Policy,” app May 1942, and “For GC&CS”
August 5, 1942.

75. (U) NSA RAM File, app. May, 1942, OP-20-G
toStation X, “Latest Thoughts on Electronic
Developments.”

76. (U) Much ofthe information on GC&CS’s
actions and intention remains in closed archives, and
some informed historical guesses have tobe made.
One of those is that GC&CS’s failure to send requested
documentation was as much the result of the slow pace
of its four-wheel Bombe program and a desire to keep
face as it was the result of a desire to monopolize all the
“E” work.

77. (FS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946, 4.

78. S$) Britain sent more assurances to the United
States in August, but they were too late tostop “G”
from going ahead with its Bombe program. (R) NSA
CCH Series XIII Z, Eachus to Wenger, 2 August 1942,
“Full Wiring Diagram on Way.” (Sj NSA CCH Series
XII Z, Wenger to Op-20-GM, 6 August 1942, “Nature
of E machine.”

79. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to GC&CS, July 7,
1942, “Eachus & Ely,” and August 5,1942, “Send
Wiring Diagram.” NARA RG457, SRH-306, “OP-20-G
Exploits and Commendations in World War II,” 23,
“Shark was not all.” Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 236.
F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the Second World
War, Volume II(New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1981), 55-57-

80. (F545. The Robinsons were independent
creations but were much like the Bush comparator

FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREE-FO-USA-AUS-CAN-OBROANE- NZL

machines. However, they were built tohandle the
codes used onteletype systems, and they were not
strict embodiments of the IC method but of Turing’s
new Delta method, which searched for statistical bias-
es in the distribution of binary values. However, Delta
shared much with the IC approach. (TS*4S4) (Laconic,
Nocon) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty
Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,” (PS7/St NSA
CCH Series XII Z,H. H,Campaigne, “Reading
TUNNY,” NSA Technical Journal (Fall 1962).
Trs4+Sh NSA CCH Local Archive, “Army-Navy
Descriptive Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,” Army
Security Agency, February 1947.

81. TTS7/S®- Letters from Howard Campaigne to
Brian Randell circa 1975. Thomas H. Flowers, “The
Design of Colossus,” Annals ofthe History of
Computing ,5 (July 1983), 224. I.J. Good, “Early
Work onComputers at Bletchley,” Cryptologia 3
(1979), 65-77. (TSH4845) NSA CCH Series XTI Z, H. H.
Campaigne, “Reading TUNNY,” NSA Technical
Journal (Fall 1962).

82. (FS44SD The Robinsons, also called “bed-
steads,” became more and more powerful and rapid.
Some models used vacuum tubes, and bythe war's
end, one of the Robinsons used four tapes. TS.NSA
CCH Series XII Z,GCHQ, “Machine Solution of
TUNNY Traffic (Robinson),” 22 August 1943. TTS44S).
NSA CCH Local Archive, “Army-Navy Descriptive
Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,” Army Security
Agency, February 1947.

83. (U) NSA CCH XIK, S.Snyder, Box, II, B.
Randell, “The Colossus,” June 1976. (TS4SD_ NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “Theory of Rectangles: Photostat of
British Paper describing breaking ofthe TUNNY
Machine by Means of Rectangles,” 4 September 1944.
FFS4/SD NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Fish Notes,”
December 1944. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Colossus, Instructions and procedures used in setting
FISH messages on the Colossus,” 14 December 1944.

84. (TS74SQ NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Colossus,
Instructions and procedures used in setting FISH mes-
sages on the Colossus,” 14 December 1944.

85. (U) Thomas H.Flowers, “The Design of
Colossus,” Annals of the History of Computing 5 (July
1983): 240. Allen W.M. Coombs, “The Making of
Colossus” Annals ofthe History of Computing 5

Page 119
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TC-USAAUS-OAN-GBR-AND-NALUKE

(1983): 253-259. W.W. Chandler, “The Installation
and Maintenance of Colossus,” Annals of the History
of Computing 5 (1983): 260, Andrew Hodges, Alan
Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1983), 268. Although their documentation is still clas-
sified, there were additional electronic machines in
GC&CS’s arsenal bythe end of the war. Apparently,
they went beyond Colossus.

86. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-349, “Achievements
of the SSA in World War II,” and SRH-361, “History of
the Signal Security Agency.”

87. (U) NSA RAM File, OP-20-G to GC&CS, app.
May, 1942, ‘Future E Policy, and Wenger to Ely,
August 5, 1942.

88. (U) Ronald Lewin, The American Magic (New
York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1982), 85. Rear Admiral
Edwin T. Layton, etal, And I Was There: Pearl
Harbor and Midway: Breaking the Secrets (William
Morrow & Co., Inc., 1985), 95. W, J. Holmes, Double-
Edged Secrets (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1979). One story isthat Washington found different
additives from their JN-25 analyses and thought that
Hawaii was far off base regarding the recovered code
groups.

89, (U) NSA RAM File, August 5, 1942, Wenger to
Ely. NSA RAM File, Part Il of Report to J. N. Wenger,
Capt. USN, “Resume ofthe Dayton, Ohio Activity
During World War II.” Hagley Museum and. Library,
Accession 1825, Honeywell vSperry-Rand, Trial
Records, August 19, 1942, Desch to Engineering
Department, “Special Switch,” and September 18,
1942, “Change in Specifications.”

go. (U) NSA RAM File, Part II. of Report to J. N.
Wenger, Capt. USN, “Resume ofthe Dayton, Ohio
Activity During World War IT.”

91. (U) Asimple electronic American Bombe
would have sixty-four fixed double wheels calling for at
least 7,000 tubes, probably twice that. Amplifiers and
control electronics would probably have called for
another 10,000 or so. Auniversal machine, in which
all wheels could be automatically set, would have
needed close to 100,000 tubes. Correspondence with
Joseph Eachus. NSA RAM File, Wenger to GC&CS,
September 4, 1942, “Electronic Device.”

92. (U) F.H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the
Second World War,Volume III (New York:

Page 120

Cambridge University Press, 1981), 56. For the inde-
pendent research agreement, interview with Joseph
Eachus. The situation with the American army may
have been even more critical. It was a pure consumer
of Ultra and much other intelligence during the North
African invasion and as late as February 1943, it was
dependent on GC&CS for German signal intelligence.
NARA RG457, SRH-364, “History ofthe Signal
Security Agency, Volume One Parts 1and 2, 1939-
1945. A Declaration of Independence.”

93. SANSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger,
18-9-1942, “British four-wheel design not progress-
ing.”

94. (FS) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946, 4.-CEQ._NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23 1942,
“Your Bombe plan approved.”

95. (U} NSA RAM File, September 3, 1942,
Wenger toOP-20, “Cryptanalysis ofthe German
(Enigma) Machine.” F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence
inthe Second World War, Volume IL(New York-,
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 57. Hagley
Museum and Library, Accession 1825, Honeywell v
Sperry-Rand, Trial Records, September 18, 1942,
Desch to Engineering Department. Compare the
Americans’ promised production rate with Keen's out-
put. Martin Campbell-Kelly, IC Z:A Business and
Technical History, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989),
118-119. Ifthe United States had built the 350
machines rather than the 100 inthe first batch, the
cost would have been a staggering $16,000,000 based
on the $45,000 per machine for the production run.

96. TS), NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to
OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” 15 September 1942.

97. #8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Report of
Dr. Turing, “Visit to National Cash Register
Corporation of Dayton, Ohio,” circa Dec. 1942.

98. (F8} NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Hight, 1939-1945,” 63, states that
the later versions of the British high-speed Bombe had
fast wheels which moved at10,000 revolutions per
minute. But this figure may bea typographical error.
Most other sources give amuch lower rpm for the
British four-wheel Bombe. See CBS) NSA CCH Series
XU Z, Hut 6, “Electronics for Bombe not Working,”

TOP SECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSA-AUS,-CAN,-GER-AND NaN
FOR-GEGRETHCOMINTHREE-FO USA, AUS: CAN, GBR AND NZDIXT

which in late 1942 gives a projected speed of 2,000
rpm. Also see (8&8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Joan
Murray, “A Personal Contribution tothe Bombe
Story,” NSA Technical Journal, 20 (Fall 1974): 41.

99. () NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to
OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” 15 September 1942.

100. (S$, NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to
OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” 15 September 1942,
9.

101. #8) A full diagonal board would bea 26x 26
matrix, which would need 676 primary tubes and a
score of complementary electronic components.
(S) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to OP-20-G,
“Memo of present plans for an electromechanical ana-
lytical machine,” 15 September 1942, 9.

102. (S) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch to
OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” 15 September 1942, 1.

103. FFSASI) Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5, CIT Ts-
10-E-5, “Bombe Computations.”

104. (F&4S8D NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The “Yellow Machine,” 50-
52. (T8778 Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5, CI’F
Ts-10-E-5, “Bombe Computations.” (SASH NSA
AHA 16331, “6812th Signal Security Detachment
(PROV) Apo 413 Army,” 15 June 1945.

105. (8S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Engstrom to
Desch, September 23, 1942, “Your Bombe plan
approved,” 65} NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch
to OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” September 15, 1942,
2.

106. (F8448)) The men at “G” were not able to
intercept and interpret strong menus for quite some
time, they sent very weak menus tothe Bombes
throughout much of 1942 and 1943, They realized they
were dependent upon the British for the types of
menus that made the Bombes useful by having very
few “stories” produced per run. (FS) NSA AHA ACC
35701 “History ofthe Bombe Project,” 16 February
1946. FFS+4S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, GCCS, “OP-20-
G Contribution.” (F3448D Navy Dept., Office of Chief

—FOR-SEGRETIGOMINTHREL—FO-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZE-

of Naval Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume
5., CIT TS-10-E-5, “Bombe Computations.” TS. NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The
Yellow Machine,” 50-52.

107. #8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to
Desch, September 23, 1942, “Your Bombe plan
approved.” €8} NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Joseph Desch
to OP-20-G, “Memo of present plans for an electro-
mechanical analytical machine,” September 15, 1942,
2.

108. #8) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum for
OP-20-G, “Collaboration of U. S.and British Radio
Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and German
Projects,” J. N. Wenger, October 1, 1942.

109. €8}.NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum
for OP-20-G, “Collaboration of U. S. and British Radio
Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and German
Projects,” J. N. Wenger, October 1, 1942.

110. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1825, Honeywell uv Sperry-Rand ,Trial Records,
September 18, 1942, Desch to Engineering
Department. F.H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the
Second World War, Volume II (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1981), 56. NARA RG457, SRH 361,
“History ofthe Signal Security Agency,” 274. NSA
RAM File: OP-20-G to GC&CS July 7, 1942; OP-20-G
to OP-20 September 3,1942; J.N. Wenger to OP-20-
GM, August 6,1942; Wenger to Ely, August 5, 1942;
and “Engstrom to Meader re Turing visit,” January 1,
1943.

111. (%) NSA CCH, Series XII Z, Memorandum for
OP-20-G, “Collaboration of U. S.and British Radio
Intelligence Organizations on Japanese and German
Projects,” J. N. Wenger, October 1, 1942.

112. (U) Of course, the Americans did not suspect
that Britain had its own Russian informant who was
telling all toStalin. Christopher Andrew and Oleg
Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside Story ofIts Foreign
Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev (New York:
Harper Collins, 1990), 304.

113. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-306, “OP-20-G
Exploits and Commendations in World War H,” 19. F.
H. Hinsley, British Intelligence inthe Second World
War, Volume II(New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1981), 57. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 243.

Page 121
FOP-GEGRETHIGOMINTFHIREL—-FO-UGA AU S-CAN-OBROANB-NZEHE-

TSA.NSA CCH Series XII Z, Wenger to OP-20, October
1,1942, “Collaboration of U. S.and British radio
Intelligence organizations on Japanese and German
projects.”

114. (U) Very useful on the question of the U.S.
Army's Ultra struggle is “Origins, Functions &
Problems ofthe Special Branch, M.L. S.,” inJohn
Mendelshon (ed.), Covert Warfare: Intelligence,
Counterintelligence and Military Deception During
the World War II Era (Garland, 1989).

115. TESL.NSA CCH Series IV.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945,” 90.

116. GFRA8E) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944 [sic], cites
October 1942 as the date of arrival of the first M8, but
other sources claim it arrived in spring 1943. On the
Mg, interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 14 September
1994.

117. (TSA4GH NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G}, RIP 425, “The American Attack onthe
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic] (TS#4SD
NSA CCH “P” Series, Box CCo67, CITS, “E” Series,
Vol. E-7.

118. (FAAS. Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The
Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 236.
NSA RAM File, January 5,1943, “Report on Turing
Visit to Dayton.” (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Dr. Turing
of GC. &C.S., “Visit to National Cash Register
Corporation,” December, 1942. (TS7/Str NSA CCH
Series XII Z, OP-20-G “Memoranda on Bombe and
the relationship of the U.S. and U. K.,” circa 1943.

119. f} Turing remarked about Desch’s apparent
decision not to use some features already planned for
the new British four-wheel Bombe. t8} NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Report of Dr. Turing, “Visit to National
Cash Register Corporation of Dayton, Ohio,” circa Dec.
1942.

120. (93 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Eachus to Wenger,
18 September 1942, “British four wheel design not pro-
gressing.” (Si NSA CCH Series XIU Z, Report of Dr.
Turing, “Visit to National Cash Register Corporation of
Dayton, Ohio,” circa Dec. 1942.

Page 122

121. (ES) On British comments besides those of
Turing, NSA CCH, shinn box, “Desch.”

122. (FS). NSA CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to
Desch, September 23, 1942, “Your Bombe plan
approved.”

123. (S) NSA RAM File,, January 5, 1943, “Report
on Turing visit to Dayton”; January 20, Engstrom to
Meader, “Change Bombe Design”; and March 17, 1943
Prototypes constructed... §&) NSA CCH Series XL Z,
Report of Dr. Turing, “Visit to National Cash Register
Corporation of Dayton, Ohio,” circa. December 1942.
tS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Dr. Turing of G.C.& CS.
“Visit toNational Cash Register Corporation,”
December 1942.

124. tS) Onthe gearing, interview with Philip J.
Bochicchio, 6-14-94.

125. (S.NSA CCH Series XII Z, Dr. Turing of G.C.
&C. S., “Visit to National Cash Register Corporation,”
December 1942.

126. (F846) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G
“Memoranda on Bombe and the relationship of the
U.S. and U.K.,” circa 1943.

127. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-14-
94.

128. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio 6-14-
94.

129. (FS). Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-
14-94. NSA, CCH Series XII Z,CNO, CITP 88,
“Technical and Theoretical Report of N-530 BOMBE,
Navy Dept., Washington, D.C., September, 1946.

130. TTSYSL.NSA RAM File, December 11, 1942,
Horn to Robinson, “Procurement of Materials for
7892,” and December 28, 1942, CNO to Deeds, “Help
needed on special project at NCR.” (TSA465. NSA CCH
Series XII Z, OP-20-G “Memoranda on Bombe and
the relationship of the U.S. and U. K.,” circa 1943.

131. (U) NSA RAM File, January 5, 1943, Wenger
toMeader, “Turing Visit,"Andrew Hodges, Alan
Turing: The Enigma (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1983), 236.

132. TES} NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946.

133. (JU) NSA NCML Message File, for example,
June 4, 1943, “Use most Adam-Eve time for real tests.”

134. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message file, May 24,
1943, “DC has sent test problems for prototypes,” and

TOP-SECRETHICOMINTHREL-TO USA AUS CAN GBR AND NACHT
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREE-TO-USA AUS, CAN GBR AND ANZEHAT

May 29, 1943, “Adam Eve have serious technical prob-
lems.” The first British four-wheel Bombe was com-
pleted in June 1943. F. H. Hinsley, British Intelligence
inthe Second World War, Volume II (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 748.

135. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, May 29,
1943, “Shorts and opens,” and May 31, 1943, “Can use
part of machine only.”

136. FPS4'S6H NSA NCML-CSAW Message File,
May 20, 1943,”Redman Visit,” and May 29, 1943
“Adam and Eve problems.” F.H. Hinsley, British
Intelligence inthe Second World War,Volume II
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 748.
Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 267. W.W.
Chandler, “The Installation and Maintenance of
Colossus,” Annals ofthe History of Computing
5 (1983): 261. FS) On the date of England’s first four-
wheel Bombe, (P5482). NSA CCH Series XII Z, GCCS,
OP-20-G Contribution.

137. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, June
14,1943, “Cain and Abel.”

138. (U) The first “formal” production model was
turned over to the navy at Dayton for testing on July 4,
1943, and its first test run was on July 23, 1943. Cain
and Abel were off the line in the first week of July but
were not ready for final testing until the last week of
the month. Another complication was the delayed
completion of the new building in Washington. Desch
did make some minor changes after Engstrom’s
request. NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 6,
1943, July 26,1943, and July 23, 1943, “Status of
Bombes.”

139. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 26,
1943, Dayton to Washington ‘Bombes may not work.’

140. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 29,
1943, Desch to Engstrom, July 29, 1943, “Fast wheel
running too hot, bombe may not work.”

141. (U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, 6-14-
84.

142. (FS) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-49,
“A Posteriori Remarks on the Cryptanalytic Aspects of
the Bulldozer,” Navy Dept., Washington, September
1946.

143. (FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Hut 6, 4 October
1942, ‘Electronics for Bombe not Working.’ FRNSA

FOP-GEGRETHCOMIFFHREL—F0-UG A -AUS-GAN-GBR-AND NZL

CCH Series XII Z, Engstrom to Desch, September 23,
1942, “Your Bombe plan approved.”

144. (E8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, Joan Murray,
“A Personal Contribution tothe Bombe Story,” NSA
Technical Journal, 20 (Fall 1974): 41.

145. 4S+NSA CCH Series XII Z, Joseph Desch,
“Pian for the American Bombe,” September 15, 1942.
+F5/+65 NSA CCH Series XII Z (S-2568) “Tentative
Brief Descriptions of Cryptanalytic Equipment for
Enigma Problems,” Circa 1945.

146. TPS//SH NSA CCH Series XII Z (S-2568)
“Tentative Brief Descriptions of Cryptanalytic’
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” Circa 1945.

147. €E54/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944. [sic] #8) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The
Yellow Machine,” 50-52.

148. €F87/SH Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval
Operations, RIP 607, Enigma Series, volume 5., CIT
Ts-10-E-5, “Bombe Computations,” 5-14. (S$. NSA,
CCH Series XII Z,“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The
Yellow Machine,” 12, 16. (P5446 NSA AHA 16331,
“6812th Signal Security Detachment (PROV ) Apo 413
Army,” 15 June 1945. (8) NSA, CCH Series II Z,
CNO, CITP 88, “Technical and Theoretical Report of
N-530 BOMBE,” Navy Dept., Washington, D.C.,
September 1946.

149. (S$) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic
Report #2 The Yellow Machine,” 3, 54.

150. (8) NSA CCH Series.V.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1939-1945.”

151. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File,
November 12, 1943, “85 Bombes in D.C.”

152. (U) The first Bombe contract was terminated
on December 1, 1943, but some of the first models con-
tinued totrickle into Washington as late as Summer
1944. NSA RAM File, History of OP-20-G /NCML/4e,
June, 1944, “n530 bombes.”

153. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File,
November 29, 1943, ‘Bombe shipment from Dayton.’

154. (U) H. F. Hinsley, et al., British Intelligence in
the Second World War,Volume II(New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 57-8 and 752.

Page 123
~FOR-SEGREFICOMINTHREL-T0-U6A aS -CaN-CBR-AND-NEEIE-

Andrew Hodges, Alan Turing: The Enigma (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 262.

155. CFS44SR NSA CCH Series XII Z, ($12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack onthe
German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944, [sic] 23.

156. CPS} NSA CCH Series [V.7.20, A. P. Mahon,
“The History of Hut Eight, 1930-1045.”

157. (U) H. F. Hinsley, et al., British Intelligence in
the Second World War, Volume II(New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1981), 752. NARA
RG457, SRH-141, Papers from the Personal Files of
Alfred McCormick, Part 2,” March 4, 1944,
“Memorandum for General Bissel, Army-Navy
Agreement Regarding Ultra” Thomas Parrish, The
Ultra Americans: The United States’ Role in Breaking
the Nazi Code (New York: Stein & Day, 1987), 79.
NSA RAM File, February 21, 1944, W. A. Wright to OP-
20-G,"Comparison of Army and Navy Enigma
Equipment.”

158-¢F8}-NSA CCH R Collection, Box CCO 66, OP-
20-GY-A, “American Cryptanalysis of German Naval
Systems,” 7 July 1944. €F&Sh- NSA AHA ACC 13657,
“GC. & CS. Naval SIGINT. Vol. III, German
Cryptographic Systems and Their Solution.”

159. (287 NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946, 9-T9\NSA CCH
Series XII Z,21-2-1944, OP-20-G to British Admiralty
Delegation, “U.S. Will Increase Efforts."-F&448) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, Alexander to Lt. Church, 24 March
1944, “British will emphasize building three-wheel
bombes.”

160. 4684/8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. 84455 NSA CCH Series XII
Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953,

161. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July 20,
1943, “New procedure, grenade,” and August 14, 1943,
“Progress on grenade.” The grenades were also used
on the four-wheel problems when it was thought that
one of the wheel settings was known.

162. 4754458 NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley. “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. (FS7#65 NSA CCH Series XII
Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

Page 124

163. CFS4SH. NSA CCH Series XII Z(S-2568)
“Tentative Brief Descriptions of Cryptanalytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” circa 1945.

164. (U) NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, July
20, 1943, “New procedure, grenade,” and August 14,
1943, “Progress on grenade.” (6} NSA CCH Series XII
Z, Descriptions of NSA Early SPDs and Computers, as
compiled from various NSA sources.

165. (S465 NSA CCH “P” Series, Box CCoo06,
CNO CITS TA-10-E-1, Volume 1,The Click Process,
January 1946. She pointed tothe use of the message
indicators asthe “crib,” but other cribs could be used
by the Grenades.

166. fel NSA CCH Series XII Z, Descriptions of
NSA Early SPDs and Computers, ascompiled from
various NSA sources.

167. -€FS+30- NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. (TS//SI) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

168-€ES7/SP-NSA CCH Series XII Z,‘Le.Roy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953 and various years. (TS7/SI_ NSA CCH Series XII
Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

169. €4-NSA CCN Series XII Z, Descriptions of
NSA Early SPDs and Computers, ascompiled from
various NSA sources.

170.7CFS464-NSA CC’ Series XH Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953 and various years. TTS7/SH.NSA CCH Series XII
Z, copies of various MAC Outlines, circa 1953.

171. ~€FS* ($2568) NSA CCH Series XIl Z,
“Tentative Brief Description of General Analytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March 1945.

172. (BS) (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Tentative Brief Description of General Analytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March 1945. “A
Time of Triumph.”

173. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval
Communications, “Brief Descriptions of RAM
Equipment,” Washington, D.C., October 1947. NSA
RAM File, Report of R. I. Meader, Captain USNR to J.
H. Wenger, Captain, USN, “14 Days Training Duty,
Report of,” January 21, 1949.
TOP-SPCRETHCOMINTIREL-TO-USA-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHA—

174. (U) NSA RAM File, CNO, U,S, Naval
Communications, CITP TP-33 “Overhaul of Hypo #1,”
Washington, D.C., June 1945.

FOP-SECRETHCCMINTHREL-FO-USA,AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NEEM Page 125
Page 126

This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 5

(U) A Search for Other “Bombes”

 

(U) The arrival ofthe United States Navy’s
Bombes in Washington in autumn 1943 allowed
OP-20-GM to turn its attention to Japan. It also
gave some of its men time to think of advancing
beyond electromechanics. But the tenuous con-
trol over the Enigma systems and the challenges
of the very stubborn Japanese codes and ciphers
meant that electromechanics and the Bombes
continued to demand much of the energies of the
Americans.

(U) OP-20-GM explored many electronic and
photo-optical possibilities during the last two
years ofthe war asit attempted to conquer
Japan's systems, and as it responded to Britain’s
cries for help to fight changes in Germany’s codes
and ciphers. In a few instances “M” was able to go
beyond the technology ofthe Bombes, but in
most cases ithad torelegate electronics and
advanced film-based processing to small
exploratory projects. Only when there was a com-
bination of an inescapable demand for ultra-high
speeds and a possibility of coaxing electronics
into behaving would “G” allow its engineers to try
to turn their electronic dreams into hardware.

(U) The army’s SIS also had to drop its ambi-
tious early plans for advanced electronic devices.
Like the navy’s cryptanalysts, its men had to turn
to quick and rather clumsy solutions during the
first years of the war.

(U) Meanwhile, the Army

(U) Inlate 1942, while OP-20-G’s cryptana-
lysts were establishing their place in European
communications intelligence, the American
army’s codebreakers struggled to gain just a
foothold. Unlike the navy, the army was not
involved in European-related action until well

TOR-SECRET/COMMFHREL-FO-UGA AUS -CAN-GEROAND NECN T

 

after the outbreak of the war. It had a more diffi-
cult time than the navy inintercepting enemy
messages, and the British were much less in need
of its cooperation. *

€F8745H) The British had begun to share their
knowledge of German and Italian diplomatic traf-
fic before the war, but they were more than reluc-
tant to allow the American army arole inthe
German army and air force systems.” At first, the
Signal Corps and the SIS were not worried about
their inability to read the German military traffic.
Just before Pearl Harbor they indicated they were
not interested in working onthe army and air
force problems. But when troops were committed
to North Africa, attitudes changed dramatically.
The Americans realized the shortcomings of
depending on intelligence supplied by another
nation. The SIS wanted its own control over
Enigma, but it had few capabilities.

(U) Founded toreplace Herbert Yardley’s
infamous Black Chamber inthe late 1920s, the
armys Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) began
with what Joseph Wenger yearned for, acore of
young and talented civilian mathematicians.
Under William F. Friedman they became respect-
ed for their use of statistical methods.* Much of
their time and expertise was devoted to creating
codes and ciphers for the army. But they devoted
anincreasing amount ofeffort to operational
cryptanalysis.

(U) Although separate from OP-20-G, the SIS
had a gentlemen’s agreement about cryptanalytic
turf. Friedman’s group agreed to focus on enemy
army systems but toshare arather ill-defined
zone of diplomatic and clandestine traffic with
“G.” The Coast Guard’s cryptanalytic office, led by
Friedman’s wife, and the FBI’s codebreaking

Page 127
TOR.SECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSAAUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEE-

group shared in tapping the diplomatic and clan-
destine traffic inthe Americas. Like OP-20-G’s
crew during the 1930s, the SIS’s men were direct-
edto concentrate on Japan’s secret systems but
not given the resources to fulfill the charge.

(U) The difficulty of intercepting enough mil-
itary messages extended tothe SIS’s attack on
Japan’s army systems. Unlike the use of high-
powered radio by the navies, the armies and air
forces of the world used low-power systems and
sent relatively few messages that could be inter-
cepted from a great distance. Even after the SIS
constructed listening posts in the Pacific and the
Canal Zone,° it could not acquire military mes-
sages in enough “depth” for code or cipher break-
ing,

(U) As a result, Friedman’s talented men and
women spent much of their time during the 1930s
on diplomatic communications. After months of
intense work, in 1940 they laid the foundation for
America’s Magic bysuccessfully attacking
Japan’s new Purple enciphering machine system.
Itcarried Japan’s most important diplomatic
messages toand from the world capitals.
Although Friedman’s group received help from
the navy in attacking Purple, Magic was seen as
an SIS triumph by the nation’s leadership.

(U) Friedman’s group had employed modern
as well astraditional cryptanalytic techniques
against Purple. A few years after OP-20-G began
to use tabulating machines, the SIS established its
first automation foothold.” Although it did not
begin an OP-20-G-like Rapid Machine project
before the war, the SIS hired a newly minted MIT
electrical engineer ata critical stage inthe
Japanese diplomatic problem. That graduate of
MIT’s electrical engineering department, Leo
Rosen, helped break into the Japanese diplomat-
ic machine and constructed its first analog.®

(U) Although William F. Friedman’s group

had ideas for teletype-tape comparators, iso-
morph machines, and relay attachments for tabu-

Page 128

lators, it did not have the resources to turn them
into hardware. Itdid not gobeyond building
direct analogs of enemy machines.

(U) The Search for Another American Ultra

(U) When war broke out, the SIS had little
cryptanalytic capability, few intercepts, and little
machinery. It had no Enigma proficiency, it was
unable to read the major Japanese or German
military codes, and ithad few messages or
machines with which to analyze them. In fact, it
appeared that it would be some time before the
SIS would have much to work on.

(U) Itdid get one assignment but through
default. “G” was overworked because of its efforts
against critical German and Japanese naval sys-
tems. Out of necessity, itturned all ofthe
Japanese diplomatic problem over tothe SIS.®
That Purple diplomatic challenge took much of
the army’s attention inthe first year of the war,
although the system had already been solved.
Purple had become arelatively easy system to
exploit. It needed afew new electromechanical
analogs, but it demanded little else. Even Britain
cooperated. It sent intercepts and cryptanalytic
advice to Friedman’s Japanese experts. The
attention was well rewarded. Much was learned
about Germany, as well as Japan, from the radio
and cable messages toand from Japan’s
embassies in Axis and neutral nations.

(U) The German problems were very differ-
ent. Its diplomatic systems proved difficult to
enter, and its military codes and ciphers resisted
attack. As important, the British, who held many
secrets toentering Enigma and other German
ciphers, did not wish to grant the SIS power over
Germany’s army or air force systems.

(U) The SIS badly needed Britain’s help. It
began World War II with as little, perhaps less,
potential to enter German systems as OP-20-G.
When the SIS finally decided to establish an
Enigma program and demanded tobecome a

—FOP-GECREHCOMINT REL—FO-UEA-AUS,-CAN GBR ANONZLLX..
—FOP-SECREH/GOMINFHREL-F0-UEA-AUS-CAN,-GBR-AND-NZL/X 1.

partner in Ultra, it found that it had little to nego-
tiate with. Its main bargaining chips, Purple and
Magic, had been given away in early 1941."°

(U) The SIS had amuch more difficult time
than OP-20-G ingaining GC&CS’s trust.
Throughout the war the SIS men felt they had to
fight much harder than the navy for British con-
cessions on Ultra.“ They worried that the British
promises of full cooperation that had been made
as early asthe autumn of1940 might never be
kept. Ina way, their fears were correct. GC&CS
never granted the United States Army’s cryptana-
lysts as much independence as it did the navy’s
men.

(U) And while playing atug-of-war with
Britain to gain knowledge of the German ciphers,
the SIS was tormented bythe Japanese army
code problem. It was not until the spring of 1943
that the SIS centers in Washington and Australia
were able to tap a major army system."* Perhaps
itwas the need todevote its energies tothe
Japanese codes, and abelief that traditional
methods were the only alternative for such prob-
lems, that led the SIS to be much later than the
navy inestablishing aformal group to develop
rapid machines for statistical and mathematical
cryptanalysis.

(U) Its delayed start led the SIS to rely on the
navy to supply most of its initial RAM equipment.
But it then launched perhaps an overly ambitious
attempt to create a very advanced RAM, one that,
it was hoped, would leap-frog the navy’s technol-

ogy.
(U) A Great Electronic Adventure, the Freak

€P37748B Like the ex-MIT engineers at OP-20-
G, some of the SIS’s technicians had great faith in
advanced electronics. Their first dream at the
outbreak of the war was for a new type of machine
to perform one of the most tedious but important
general cryptanalytic functions, frequency count-
ing. Their goal was to create a relatively small and

 

super-fast machine to count and record all simple
and digraphic frequencies. The machine was to
dothat inone pass through a message.
Tabulators, because they had so few counters,
demanded much sorting and many card runs to
complete a full count. Many of the standard tabu-
lator frequency-counting procedures used in the
attacks against Purple, Hagelin and, later, some
teletype systems took sixty to ninety hours.”*

(U) To go beyond the “tabs” for such complex
counting was a challenge. For one thing, it called
for the creation of a new type of memory. Readily
available technological options, such as using
industrial counters to store results, meant accept-
ing slow processing and a machine that would be
the size of a room.

CESS) In mid-1942 Leo Rosen decided to
take up that challenge. Recently put in charge of a
group of engineers, he decided to establish an SIS
RAM program. He thought that it should begin
with fundamental contributions. He was deter-
mined to develop alarge high-speed electronic
memory. In addition, he told his men to create
electronic circuits that could perform analytic

 

Page 129
TOP SECRETICOMINITREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZLIX1

functions, such asa sigmage test, that were an
integral part ofall the frequency-based crypto-
attacks. > Together, he hoped they would provide
the basis for the high-speed counting machine,
Freak, a device that OP-20-G seemed unwilling to
produce.

GSS) Unfortunately, Rosen picked a much
too ambitious goal for the army’s first RAM
adventure. It took a year and a half before Freak I
emerged from the SIS workshop; then, it proved
too delicate for operational work.

 

(U) Freak

(48/451) Freak’s design and components were
major advances in the technology of calculation.
Rosen’s group had decided touse more than
7,000 condensers for the machine’s mass “mem-
ory.” One thousand twenty-four sets of seven con-
densers each were the “counters” in Freak. © By
using the binary counting system, every set could
hold a count of up to ninety-nine. The enormous
number of condensers accounted for much of the

Page 130

size of Freak I. The machine was nine feet high by
eight feet long. *”

€FS+45H There were great hopes that Freak
would speed all types of counting and analysis. As
the data were read in from two tape readers and
processed through arelay system, the appropri-
ate counters were incremented. Then the
advanced electronic digital circuits calculated
running frequencies and the critical SUM
(N(N1)/2). The circuits also scanned the counters
and controlled an electromatic typewriter which
printed the results.

(S/8D The use of the bina-
ry system, the memory technol-
ogy, and the digital calculations
were advanced for the time.”
Freak I, unfortunately, did not
have along oruseful life. The
counters proved unreliable, and
the electronic circuitry was
troublesome. The machine was
so uncooperative that it was dis-
mantled in mid-1944, just six
months after its birth.”

€#33 The defeat on the first
Freak tempered the SIS’s faith
in electronics, but its engineers
decided to try again. They con-
structed asecond version that
began twenty operations in
spring 1945. It proved more reli-
able than its predecessor. *°

(U) Tabulators and Traffic: A Data
Processing War

(U) Despite the affection for electronics, the
SIS placed its faith in older technologies during
the first critical months of the war. The SIS made
an agreement with IBM and soon had scores of
tabulating machines. Many IBM engineers were
“FOP-SECRETCOMINTHREL-FO-UGA-AUE--GAN-GER-AND-NZLIIN4..

sent to Washington to make significant modifica-

tions to the tabs and sorters, and IBM’s factories
were kept busy producing special devices. By the
end ofwar, the SIS had close togoo IBM
machines using a million IBM cards a day.

(PS4#6H- The workforce for the machines
grew from fewer than 100 at the end of 1942 to
600 a year later. By the end ofthe war the SIS’s
tab rooms had close to 1,200 workers.“

(FSHSP#-As the SIS waited for intercepts from
the Japanese military systems and hoped for
information from the British on the Enigma, they
did their best to produce intelligence from the few
sources besides Purple that were available to the
agency.”

(547/55 One of those sources was the inter-
cepts of diplomatic messages sent on Germany's
GEC system. The army’s radio men had been col-
lecting them on their own for some time, as well
as receiving information onthem from the
British. But collecting was easier than solving the
system. The GEC codes were tough. The Germans
used code words doubly enciphered with addi-
tives.

€F87/S1) The tabulator group at SIS began an
attack onthe system using labor-intensive tech-
niques similar to those the navy had developed to
breach the Japanese navy’s additive systems. The
going was difficult, however. The usual attacks
did not seem to work. The Germans had a very
clever keyword system for specifying the addi-
tives that proved difficult for the Americans to
penetrate during their first year of IBM attacks.
Fortunately, the British had acquired some pages
of additives from aFrench agent and decided to
pass them to the Americans in early 1942.

CES4SH With the hints about the system, the
Americans launched their first new tabulator
attack of the war. Their work on GEC led them to
develop machine methods, such as the search for
double repeats, that were transferred to the

TOP-SEGRET/COMINT/DG——

Japanese military problems once a flow of inter-
cepts began.*3

Gs//SP But the SIS had to wait quite some
time before the army could supply enough
Japanese material. Then the SIS cryptanalysts
found that Japan’s military had, perhaps unwit-
tingly, been wiser than its diplomats. Japan's
diplomats had made a mistake by basing their
secret communications system ona machine. By
turning tothe latest technology, they had made
their ciphers more vulnerable than ifthey had
used, for example, crude one-time pads.

€¥8/88 In contrast, the Japanese military had
decided to stay with older methods. In doing so,
they frustrated the British and American code-
breakers and forced them toturn to very “data
heavy” methods. The Japanese army’s code-with-
additive systems were vulnerable to capture, but
neither the Americans nor the British acquired
any significant amounts of material during the
first years of the war.

(IS#/81) Acryptanalytic attack without cap-
tures, or quite evident “busts,” demanded enor-
mous numbers of intercepts, analysts, and
machines. It meant that the SIS had to engage in
a frustrating data processing war.

GS4/SH Despite the allocation of massive
amounts ofresources tothe problem, the
Japanese army’s systems resisted longer than its
navy’s. The difficulty of intercepting its messages,
its use of complex additive systems, and its clever
ways of hiding the information contained in the
message preambles led toa near cryptanalytic
blackout during 1942 and 1943.

F845 The inability of the Allies to read the
major army systems through cryptanalysis led the
SIS torely upon traffic analysis; asa conse-
quence, IBM tabulators and methods quite like
those in business data processing became essen-
tial to its operations.*+ Throughout the war hun-
dreds of machines and people were kept busy

Page 131
“TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX4.

sorting, counting, and listing frequencies of com-
munications among units. Even when some of the
major army systems had been penetrated, 20 per-
cent of the total machine hours in SIS were devot-
ed just to the analysis of the message headings.

€F8//5H Keypunching and the physical main-
tenance of card files for the traffic analysis pro-
cessing were demanding by themselves.
Recording and analyzing 300,000 messages a
month for traffic analysis was not uncommon.
Huge decks of cards had tobe carefully loaded
into the tabs and sorters for the first of the many
steps in each analysis routine, then reloaded sev-
eral times to complete a process. The pressures all
that created were so great that the SIS Machine
Branch had to endure acritical personnel prob-
lem: after several weeks oftraining, machine
operators quit. The young civilian women were
apologetic, but insisted they be allowed to leave.
The night shifts were especially difficult to staff,
and it was only the arrival of WACS, who were
allowed to live on base and who were unable to
resign, that allowed the machine room to contin-
ue its twenty-four-hour work day.*

(L) Making the Tabs More Powerful

¢48) The IBM tabulators remained the foun-
dation ofthe SIS’s operation and for more than
traffic analysis. The continued dependency on the
tabs was reflected inthe intense efforts the SIS
made to increase their power. By the end ofthe
war, the Arlington Hall engineers had helped to
develop animpressive array of specialized IBM
equipment as well asa whole series of complex
relay attachments. *°

CFS7/SP Modified “tabs” were the technology
for the SIS’s work on Japanese code problems.
Some twenty-three different relay attachments
were used to attack Japanese army systems. In
many instances, the attachments were so power-
ful that the “tabs” were relegated to being mere
input-output devices serving the relay cabinets.

Page 132

(ES448B The complex relay circuits placed on
the tabs automatically stripped additives, applied
possible encryption squares, and even searched
to see if the results of additive removal had led to
the appearance of high-frequency code groups.
The more complex attachments received names,
such as Brute Force, Camel, JMA, the Selective
Square, or the Limited Selector.

€F87/8B-The modifications that automatical-
ly decoded upwards of 2,500 messages a day were
of special pride to the SIS’s machine branch. They
allowed the timely exploitation of the captures of
cipher text and key that began to flow into
Arlington Hall during 1944.”’

€F57/5B One of the most impressive of the
SIS’s tabulator modifications was the Slide Run
machine. Its origins illustrate why most of
America’s codebreaking history isso unlike the
thrilling story of MAGIC, when a brilliant insight
supposedly led toa near instant victory over a
major communications system.*®

(VU) Slides, Runs, and Endless Decks of Cards

€F874SB The mature Slide Run machine of
mid-1944 was acombination ofa 405 Tabulator
and a huge chest-high, multipanel cabinet full of
advanced relay circuits, telephone crossbar
relays, counters, and plugboards. But the Slide
Run did not begin as an elegant example of IBM’s
best work. The first two of the devices were hur-
riedly built bythe “F” Branch in late 1943 as an
emergency response to the requests of the crypt-
analysts. The “cryppies” thought they might have
found the techniques and some ofthe additive
keys needed to attack the Japanese army systems.

CPS#/SB Although hastily built to exploit a
particular opportunity, the machines proved so
valuable that a development and production con-
tract was signed with IBM. The new Slide Runs
were to be used on a variety of problems. By early
1944, IBM was constructing six more Slide Run
—FOP-GEGRETHGOMINTHREL—TOUSAAUSCAN GRE AND NZL/IX1

machines, each more sophisticated than its pred-
ecessor. *?

<48}/5B-The Slide Run machines were badly
needed because of the continuing difficulties with
Japanese army systems. The Japanese army
problem was very difficult and all attacks were
extremely labor intensive. Hundreds of cryptana-
lysts at SIS had been working since the beginning
of the war to discover the numeric additives and
the codegroup meanings. The tabulators had
been called upon to process files ofas many as
3,000,000 cards.

€£5/7/56H Copperhead-like brute force search-
es, keyword searches, and repetitive additive
stripping and testing kept machine-room double
shifts busy for months. Despite all the effort,
there was little more than frustration until April
1943 when the Japanese army’s indicator system
was broken. That allowed the identification of the
enciphering squares that were used in the indica-
tors. With that breakthrough, it was possible to
identify messages that were enciphered using the
same additive pages. With knowledge ofthe
pages, an attempt could be made to place mes-
sages on overlaps by tabulator-based, brute-force
searches.

ES+4S8 At first the search for the repeat of
the same cipher groups atthe same intervals in
two messages (brute force) had tobe done
through the tedious repetition of card duplication
and endless sorting. The most efficient attacks still
demanded files of almost 200,000 IBM cards. All
that processing was tolerated just to try to find
messages that had a probability of being enci-
phered with the same set of additives. The job
became too much, even for the SIS’s hundreds of
tabulators and sorters. Away to automate the
process had to be found.

CISH/SH Inresponse tothe need, a relay
attachment was built for the brute-force search;
but the Japanese army attack continued to
demand round after round ofcard punching,

~LOR-SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZLJX1

reproduction, collating, sorting, addition, sub-
traction, multiplication, and printing. For exam-
ple, one procedure developed in the summer of
1943 hoped to recover additives by using four
copies ofa file of 430,000 cards. The files were
run three shifts a day until the end of the year.

CESHSD By fall 1943 the many tabulator
attacks and an increasing number of captures of
Japanese material allowed the accumulation of a
file of additives. The next logical steps were to try
to locate the messages that used particular addi-
tives and tostrip the additives to reveal clear
numeric codes. From there, the cryptanalyst
could recover more code meanings and decipher
more messages.

CFS//ST) The automation of the process came
gradually. At first, the “slide run” procedure was
just anew way touse the existing tabs. It was
developed toreplace the old hand methods of
applying aknown additive toa length of code,
then testing to see if a sensible result emerged. If
an unlikely group appeared after the additive had
been removed, the additive was tried against the
next offset of the text. Ifa juxtaposition of addi-
tive and cipher yielded a likely result, it was test-
ed against a file of frequently used code groups.
When a match occurred, the cryptanalysts con-
cluded that it was probable that the additive they
were trying might have been used to encipher the
current message.

(P8664 The “slide” was a common sense but
powerful technique. But even when it was imple-
mented in IBM methods, it stretched human as
well as machine resources. When regular tabula-
tor equipment was used, the routine was quite
complex. Aseries of five likely keys (additives)
was punched on cards so that they could be test-
ed against all possible positions in thousands of
messages. When the key produced, in two of the
five tested positions, code groups found among
the already known most frequent 250, the tabula-
tor printed the message number and the five code
groups.

Page 133
 

 

Teatoeee Penta sereEs ares

 

5 SE SL aS ES NN Sk a I ee ee

Geet ) Slide Rm

€PS877/SH-What came tobe called the Slide
Run machine was developed to reduce the size
and number of required card files and to speed
the “slide” testing process. The first step towards
the eventually very sophisticated device was the
invention of a code-recognition component. To
further automate the process and to reduce the
number of cards that had to be handled, acon-
version unit was constructed. Its relay circuits
stripped the additives to produce the code sent to
the recognition unit.

<FS//SD In the Slide Run machine, banks of
relays were wired tohold asmany as 250 code
groups; later versions held as many as 1,500. The
recognition unit tested each stripped group com-
ing from the tabulator’s arithmetic section to see

Page 134

ifit completed any of the code circuits. If it did,
the machine recorded a “hit.”°°

CIS//S¥) More and more “intelligence” was
built into the Slide Run machines. New models
appeared which included sensitive and labor-sav-
ing statistical threshold tests. They prevented the
printing of unprofitable reports. The first of the
postwar versions went further. Itused alog-
weighting method toreduce the number of
“prints.”

¢FS//5B The Slide Runs were of great value to
SIS, but they were not exceptionally fast nor eas-
ily “programmed.” The best of the World War II
versions read cards at a rate of 150 a minute, and
it took from three to five days of work to set the
TOP-SECRETHICONINTHREL-TO USA,_AUS,CAN GBR ANB -NZEHMT

codes in the recognition units. Then it took hours
to run the cards for a series of messages. 3*

(FSHSD The impossibility of increasing the
rate of card-sensing much beyond what had been
accomplished by 1944 is what led the SIS, in June
1945, tomake arequest for aRAM 7omm film
version ofthe three “tab” machines that had
proven souseful against the Japanese systems:
the Slide Run, the Isomorph, and the Brute Force
machines. Unfortunately for the men within Leo
Rosen’s section who, as we will see, became the
torchbearers for Bush’s ideas, the army decided
the Eastman designs should not be funded. *8

(U) The Other Bombe Program

(U) Well before any progress had been made
on the Japanese military problems, the SIS decid-
ed that ithad togain ashare ofthe European
Ultra. And like the navy, it wanted control over its
own intelligence resources. But it was ill prepared
in terms of skills, equipment, or political power

<FS4/5B The SIS did not begin its Enigma
battle technologically prepared, nor did it have
any plans for advanced anti-Enigma machines. At
the beginning of the war, the SIS’s men were told
of OP-20-G’s RAM contracts with Eastman and
Gray. Asa result, Rosen and Friedman became
interested in the possibilities of microfilm-based
machines, and they agreed to at least examine
their possibilities. Soon, they heard a few things
about the navy’s Bombe ambitions. *4

€F8//8Py But during the first months of 1942
the SIS focused on expanding its tabulator sec-
tion; it was not until late in the year that it decid-
ed to create a machine research group that had
the manpower needed to examine, let alone cre-
ate, new technologies. The MIT graduate, Leo
Rosen, was placed at the head of a small team that
began its work in the basement of an old house at
Arlington Hall Station.** One of his first actions
was to advise his superiors that the SIS should
join in the RAM program. He convinced the army

“TOP SECRETHCONMINTHREL-TO-U9A%--AUS--GAN-GCER-AND-NZLI-

to purchase almost $200,000 worth of copies of
the OP-20-G-sponsored machines from Eastman
and Gray.2° The army gave the Bureau of Ships
the funds needed to purchase machines similar to
Tessie, the IC machines, and, later, a Gray-NCR
Comparator. Letterwriters were also supplied by
the navy. As within “G,” they became an essential
part of SIS’s data processing services.

(U) Another Step Back

(8/78) Rosen’s major assignment, however,
was to produce a machine to give SIS the kind of
power the army thought OP-20-G was gaining
over GC&CS through its emerging Bombe pro-
gram. By summer 1942 he gained approval for an
SIS Bombe program. Hebegan toassemble a
force ofenlisted engineers and technicians but
soon realized that the army would be unable to
build or even design a Bombe by itself.3* His staff
remained too small through 1942, and he had to
confine its work to preliminary investigations and
minimal construction projects.

(U) One of the first ofits preliminary studies
was on the possibility of a new type of Bombe for
the army and air force Enigma problems; that
turned out tobe amajor task. Soon Rosen
thought enough had been learned to allow a com-
mitment. In October 1942 the SIS decided it had
to have its own version of a Bombe, and it was to
be acquired independently of Britain and OP-20-
G.3?

~S-Rosen’s “F” team explored an electronic
Enigma while Friedman made the rounds of the
scientists associated with the NDRC’s fire control
computers. *° Rosen’s electronic option would be
put aside for the same reasons OP-20-G had
dropped electronics during the summer. But the
SIS’s hope for atube-based solution lasted a bit
longer.*

GS+/SB Belief inthe potential of electronics

led to Rosen’s team hiring experts from the tele-
phone company. They worked onan electronic

Page 135
 

Bombe until December 1943. Then frustration
with the disappointing results led to an end of the
contract. However, SIS’s faith bounced back, and
it began the hunt for another high-speed rotor
after its “E” crisis had passed.**

(U) While Rosen and the Western Electric
experts explored electronics, one ofthe alterna-
tives recommended bythe NDRC’s researchers
was approved. What became known as Madame
X followed the general logic of the Turing attack
onthe Enigma, but it was significantly different
from the British and the OP-20-G Bombes. The
machine first appeared asa breadboard demon-
stration unit in early 1943, passed its first tests
that summer, and was available as an operational
model in October 1943.%%

8/7SB Madame X (also called “oo3”) was
huge. It was so large because the SIS had decided
to be more elegant and innovative than the navy.
It wanted one grand Enigma-fighting machine,
300 uncoordinated ones. Although itdid not
meet all its original goals, the “oo3” was an
impressive machine.** It contained 144 Enigma
scrambler units, as compared to the sixteen in the
standard OP-20-G Bombe. “oo3’s” banks could
be divided into different size groups so that as
many as twelve useful menus could be run at one

Page 136

 

time.© The army cryptanalysts knew that the
longer acrib and its chains, the fewer the false
hits. Alarge number ofunits linked through a
flexible central control system would allow sever-
al shorter cribs to be run simultaneously. *°

(#87765 The “oo3” was designed for more
than simultaneous runs, however. It was intend-
ed to be easier to use than the navy Bombe and to
have amuch faster setup time. Some of those
goals were achieved. When the “oo3” was com-
pleted, the army’s technicians sat ina “turret”
room and set plugs and switches on small control
boards rather than having to place dozens of com-

mutators on the machine as the navy’s operators
had to.

€FS77SE The “turret” system was quite inno-
vative. There were adozen ofthe switching sta-
tions in the room. Each “turret” was a small ver-
sion of a telephone switchboard with an addition,
a set of push buttons. Each board could control its
own part ofthe “oo” if simultaneous runs were
desired. Such simultaneous use seems to have
been the norm once the SIS learned that well-
selected short menus could be powerful. Strong
menus sent from England allowed the use of only
a few of the “E” units (perhaps fourteen) per test.
Typically, some ten problems were run at one

TOR-SECRETIJCOMINTJREL TOUS A, AUS -CAM—GRRAME Neth 4
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA AUS-CAN-GBRAND-NZLI

time. On its best days, “o03” completed 1,200 of
the short three-wheel runs.”*’

(FS44SD.The switchboards were used to select
which subset of the frames were to be active dur-
ing arun. The push buttons were truly a unique
and potentially valuable feature. Through them
wheel orders could be changed in one-half a sec-
ond. That allowed wheel orders to be tested in
rapid succession. Unfortunately, the other parts
of the setup, including the menu, had to be done
by hand onthe individual Enigma frames. That
led tothe setup time for the “oo3” being much
more than hoped for ~ some twenty minutes for a
test when more than wheel orders had to be
changed. At peak efficiency, acrew could place
and run twelve new menus a day.**

(U) Avery innovative and important feature
of the “oo3” was its ability to automatically con-
trol the stepping motion ofits “wheel” analog.
The relay circuits allowed the machine to use
“non-metric” motion.*?

(U) More to It Than the Madame

8) Like the navy’s Bombe, Madame X could
not work alone. Before it could be efficiently used,
the SIS had to have cribs and a list of what wheel
orders would not have to be tested. Then, after a
“hit” was found, the SIS had todo as much or
more hand-testing than the navy. Several
machines tospeed the hand work were built.
They performed the same type of functions as the
navy’s M8 and Mo.

(FSASH The army needed a special aid to help
“003” because of what might be called a design
oversight in late 1942. The design of Madame X
had begun before the SIS knew all about the
British Enigma attacks and before it had enough
experience to realize how necessary it was to have
machines that eliminated all but a very, very few
possible keys and settings. Thus, the original
Madame X did not have a full “diagonal board”
test built into it.

(FSA7SD SIS’s men thought their bombe
would be useful even though its list of “stops”
would not be filtered by a thorough test for steck-
er inconsistencies as was found onthe British
Jumbo Bombe. Asa result, they thought that a
celluloid grille would be sufficient to search for
“contradictions.”

57/85) That was incorrect. That hand “diag-
onal board” test proved so time-consuming that
the first of the SIS’s versions of grenades was con-
structed.®° But as more was learned about the
navys and GC&CS’s machines, Rosen’s team
decided to build an attachment that would auto-
mate the entire consistency-checking process.™

(484455 The American Machine Gun had its
first tests in September 1943, a month before the
second half of “oo3” was completed. Built of the
same technology asits host, the Machine Gun
searched for stecker inconsistencies and sup-
pressed all the “stops” that were logically impos-
sible given the nature of the Enigma plugboard.
The “Gun” speeded SIS’s work but caused some
discomfort for those assigned to “o03’s” rooms. It
was a very noisy device, as was what had inspired
it, Britain’s older grenade. *

t3\Some other special devices were attached
tothe original “oo3.” Like many ofthe navy’s
grenades, the army’s add-ons took advantage,
whenever possible, of German procedural errors.
But some of the attachments and alterations were
designed toapply new general cryptanalytic
knowledge to speed “oo” processing. 5%

CES445D Many of the ideas for the new attach-
ments came from the British, who were creating
similar devices for their Bombes. Their CSKO
switch, for example, had been very helpful. Once
on “003,” ithelped exploit aGerman air force
procedural rule forbidding linking any checker-
board letter to its neighbor. For example, B could
not becheckered toA orC. The Consecutive
Stecker Knockout circuits checked for such illegal

Page 137
“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREE-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-CBR AND NZEDT-

connections and prevented a “stop” from being
indicated. **

<48//5_ Madame X was given another help-
ful attachment, the Double Input. It was an appli-
cation of more sophisticated knowledge ofthe
probability aspects of cribbing. This allowed two
relatively weak menus to be run simultaneously
and to approach the power ofthe usual sixteen-
letter menu with “closure” on the crib-plain com-
binations. >

4FS//5B Alterations to “003” allowed it to
drag cribs so that it could run Swiss and Spanish
Enigma problems. And the Clambake attach-
ments were for short runs for “grenade cribs.”
The “oo3” was allowed to perform more flexible
tests by using the Oyster Schuker attachment. In
addition, methods to exploit Cillys were devel-
oped, and “oo3” was, at times, rewired to handle
special Enigma reflector runs.

<Sy There were several attempts to make
Madame X more powerful; some were very suc-
cessful. A difficult goal was to expand the powers
of “oog3” bylessening its dependency on cribs.
The first appearance of the idea for a probability-
based way to find wheel settings, as well as to deal
with garbled cipher, emerged before “oo3” was
completed.*” Taking similar British methods into
consideration, ®* the SIS cryptanalysts and engi-
neers decided to use thirty-six of “o03’s” own “M”
frames to test for the frequency of appearance of
the sixteen most unlikely letters within a fifty-two
letter test decipherment. Just the cipher text was
entered. Iffewer than nineteen ofthe fifty-two
letters that resulted from a deciphering ata par-
ticular starting point were on the high frequency
list, a “stop” was printed.*?

¢?87/8H Unfortunately, such use of “o03’s”
regular frames led to the machine being monopo-
lized by special tests. One ofthe worst of them
was “dudbusting.” Duds were messages that
should have been readable given knowledge of
their keys, but were not. They were usually the

Page 138

result of operator errors such asthe use of an
incorrect key on a system.

€FS7#78D Because dudbusting was one of the
more important tasks assigned to the “oo3,” and
because the job took so long, a decision was made
to create anew dudbuster with its own “frame,”
and, perhaps, a bank of electronic counters. The
electronics proved abit too much for an emer-
gency situation, but amore efficient and quite
impressive electromechanical (relay) Arlington
Dudbuster became an essential part ofthe SIS’s
machine rooms. The Dudbuster worked on the
principle of recognizing plain language through a
simple frequency test. Based on the characteris-
tics ofthe German language, including the
absence of “X,” each plain letter was assigned a
weight. If the summed weights equaled a thresh-
old value, text was printed, then examined, to
see iftrue German was aresult ofthe wheel
settings. °

CS//58 There was also a film RAM version
ofthe SIS statistical Dudbuster. Its birth led to
some friction between SIS and OP-20-G.
Independently of OP-20-G, the SIS cryptanalysts
conceived oftheir own film Hypo. When they
informed OP-20G of their great discovery in mid-
1943, “G’s” men became quite embarrassed. They
were forced to admit that they had thought of the
Hypo method earlier, had a machine in develop-
ment, but had not informed either the SIS or
GC&CS.

€FS74SB Despite some help from the navy, it
took along time for the SIS toturn their Hypo
dudbuster idea into hardware. It was not until
late 1944 that a special camera was linked to an
“M” frame to generate the images of the distribu-
tion of high frequency letters from each Enigma
setting. Those master films were then run, as in
Hypo, against cipher text to find the point of
greatest coincidence. °

(48448) The film dudbuster and Hypo were
often called “Grenades.” Their success led the SIS

TOR-SECRETICOMING/ REL —FO-USA AUS —GAN—-SB RANE NZ
TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TOUS, AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLIXT

toexplore the possibilities for more ambitious
film attachments and supplements for “oo3.”
Unfortunately, some ofthe most ambitious
Grenade ideas could not beimplemented. The
high-speed Azalea and Bachelor attachments
were never completed, and the plans for a super-
speed film cribdragger probably did not turn into
a project.® It is certain, however, that neither the
army nor navy ever built a Grenade that matched
the grand achievement of the British in late 1943,
its electromechanical Fillibuster. It tested four
cribs on eighty messages simultaneously. *

GSHS The alterations toMadame X did
make it more efficient, but the American army’s
Bombe continued to make many demands on the
SIS. Its manpower requirements were not as
great asthe navy’s Bombe, but it was a labor-
intensive machine. It needed more than twenty
operating personnel and forty maintenance men.

<8) Despite the large maintenance crew, the
machine had abit ofa tendency to lose its con-
centration. During its first few months, all runs
were duplicated ona second control board. And
well into 1944 it could not be coaxed into running
at the originally hoped-for speed. It had been
designed to run, if desired, at sixty pulses a sec-
ond for short periods, but its typical operating
speed was half that, thirty pulses per second.

(U) Thus, despite its great flexibility, “oo3”
was not a perfect solution. Its successes certainly
did not change the navy’s mind about Bombe
architecture. When OP-20-G decided to build a
second set of fifty machines, itfound Desch’s
commutator design much faster and more effi-
cient than a relay-based machine. ©

(U) “oo3” could not be switched toa four-
wheel mode, and twenty-six separate runs had to
be done to test a four-wheel message. As objec-
tionable to the navy’s engineers was “o03’s” slow
operating speed. The automatic control system in
Madame X did not fully compensate for its long

run times.

FOR-SEGRETICOMINTHREL-FO-LEAAUS-CAN-GRRAND-MtLHK4—

(U) The “oo3” had another feature that did
not prove as powerful as hoped. The army
machine had the circuits necessary for the “loca-
tor” task done separately bythe navy’s Hypo
machine, but the navy’s engineer-cryptanalysts
did not find “o03’s” automatic locator that attrac-
tive.

-€FS) Near the end of the war, Joseph Wenger
requested another comparison ofthe army and
navy “E” machines. Wenger decided that the OP-
20-G Bombe complex was, on average, fifty times
more productive than the army's machine in
Arlington. ©”

€F54/SB The main reason why only one “003”
was built was the SIS’s inability to convince the
British toyield the messages and techniques
needed to keep the machine busy.

(U) A Machine Looking for Work

CES445B Madame X’s construction began just
as GC&CS and the American army reached alow
point intheir relationship. Britain’s refusal to
inform the SIS about anti-Enigma methods led to
animpasse. The situation became quite tense.
The Americans, for example, refused to let Alan
Turing see their new voice scrambler system until
Britain yielded her secrets. For atime, SIS even
withheld what it was discovering about Japanese
systems.

(F84/SH Friedman’s group certainly must
have resented Britain’s request that it build a
super-Bombe for GC&CS while she would not
share her cryptanalytic secrets. There must have
been complaints about being asked to construct
advanced machines to attack the Fish system’s
Geheimschrieber yet not being allowed to have
the desired intercepts and cryptanalytic informa-
tion on Enigma.

48/485 The tensions were reduced in May

1943 after aseries of conferences, but there was
no immediate flow ofcryptanalytic secrets to

Page 139
TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO-USAAHS-CAN-GBROAND-NELHt

America, nor was there enough high-priority
work assigned to Madame X. The result was that
it seemed to be an expensive machine without a
purpose. Then, when it was finally put to work, it
served as a secondary aid to GC&CS.

CPSH/5H The SIS had not expected such a
minor role for their great computer. Its best
cryptanalysts had spent much of 1942 and 1943
trying to develop their own “E” attacks, using up
1,000 hours of “oo3” time. But after all that effort
they had to admit defeat and had toyield to
England’s monopoly of methods and its control of
intercepts. The home grown “Yellow” project for
which “oo3” was built became asubunit of
Bletchley and, to make matters worse, most of the
SIS’s involvement with “E” came through the
team ofmen itsent toEngland inlate 1943.
Americans were as busy running British Bombes
ina small town near Bletchley as they were run-
ning Madame X in America. Perhaps as depress-
ing for Rosen and his group, England was proba-
bly sending as many German air force jobs to OP-
20-G asit was sending to Arlington Hall. Asa
result, Madame X stood idle much ofthe time.
For many days ithad tobe assigned only to
“research problems.”

FS) Such disappointments with the SIS
Bombe program were perhaps what forced
Friedman to write avery defensive report about
Madame Xin early 1944. Hetried his best to
show that Madame X was superior to all the other
anti- “E” devices. He hammered at every weak-
ness of the commutator Bombes, British as well
as American. They were susceptible to mechani-
cal stress, they were not good at solving “duds,”
and they took much too long to record the “hits,”
he said. He continued by citing “oo3’s” need for
fewer maintenance personnel and by stating that
the British Bombes took twice as long as “oo3” to
run an entire problem.

Ce}-But he could not hide the deficiencies of

Madame X. He admitted that at the very least, the
“903” was five times as expensive as the British

Page 140

Bombes and that it was really slower than the
American navy’s machines. He tried to conclude
his report on an upbeat note, but his final state-
ment helps explain why Madame X was torn
down at the conclusion of the war:”° “It is thought
fair to state that, for purely operational purposes,
the rotary type of bombe is the most efficient but
for research and development of new solution
methods, the relay type, because ofits greater
flexibility, is far superior.” Madame X did win
some victories, however. As an engineering proj-
ect and as an example of America’s mass produc-
tion capabilities, it captured the respect of the
British engineers. It also served as a backup sys-
tem for GC&CS. It was kept busy from 1944 to the
end ofthe war running noncritical or stubborn
jobs sent to it by the British.

(F845) “003” cost only one-fifth of the year-
ly construction budget for asystem that also
found itself with much less than the expected
amount of work. The huge voice encryption sys-
tem the Signal Corps and the “F” section were
building, the Sigsaly, had a $5,000,000 budget in
1943.”

(U) Asa result of “oo3’s” demonstration of
the SIS’s engineering abilities, Britain asked the
agency to help solve more complex engineering
problems and gladly accepted some American
machines within GC&CS.” By the end of the war,
the SIS was busy creating very advanced
machines and, like OP-20-G, was hoping for a
permanent in-house computer program.”°

(U) More Emergencies and More
Compromises

(U) The engineers at“G” and the SIS may
have wanted to launch a far-reaching electronic
development program at the end of 1943, but the
Allies faced too many cryptological crises to allow
the pursuit of any grand ambitions. Emergencies
continued todrive the efforts atNCR and
Nebraska Avenue, as well as at Arlington Hall.
Some ofthe crises dictated the use of very

“TOP SECRETICOMINT/IREL TO USK, RUS CAN OBIE ANE NACHT
‘P.L. 86-36
f BO: 3.3(h) (2)

advanced technology, but others were handled by
relying upon traditional components and archi-
tecture.

€F87/78T) Relays remained essential for many
devices. The army put together increasingly pow-
erful versions of the “Joos polygraphic counter”
using the SIS’s versions of the Letterwriter equip-
ment. Arlington Hall’s men also lashed together
machines such asthe Kryha Decipherer and the

Longitudinal Differencing_machine. The navy

helped with the desktop

 

 

tings and motions of Tunny wheels were entered
through 200 switches. The message was read in
by a standard,tape reader. The crib, usually six to
ten “letters,” was tested against the message.
When the machine calculated that a significant
match (psi patterns) had been made, it stopped.
The lamps indicated the Tunny wheel positions.

(48448) The Dragon proved so useful that
GC&CS built a second version after the American
Dragon ate itself up. The noisy machine, which
contained more than 2,000 cross-point relays,
had atendency toconsume all the electrical
‘power at GC&CS and to wear out its real contacts

within a few weeks.” Despite its faults, it seemed
such an achievement that it was sent back to the

 

 

devices, and it went much further by putting new
types of relays to work in its electrical crib-tester
for the Purple system, the Purple Dudbuster.

(U) Relays and plugboards were used in larg-
er, stand-alone machines. Most ofthem were
quite powerful, although some were bizarre com-
binations of primitive components. The need to
create instant, yet reliable, crypt-

states after the war and was proudly displayed in
the SIS museum.”

CES448H Advanced statistical powers were
added to the Dragons. Ifthe war had not ended,
the Dragons might well have evolved into
machines whose sophistication rivaled the
COLOSSUS.”

 

analytic firefighters justified their
crudeness.

CES#7/81) One crisis machine
that had analmost vulgar look
was the embodiment ofa quite
elegant statistical attack. The
machine was the SIS’s Dragon. It
took almost a year to wire togeth-
er all its components.

GSH5®) Dragon was the crib-
dragger SIS sent toEngland in
late 1944 tohelp GC&CS attack
the German Tunny enciphering
machine. It was made of four
large racks of relay panels, rows of
switches, atape reader, alarge
control panel, and a set of indicat-
ing lamps. Acrib was set upon a
plug-board, then the known set-

FOR-SEGRETIGOMINTHREE-TO-USA AUS CAN-GBR AND NZEIMT

 
  
      

dome eagle ar

 

   
    

     
  
    
 
 
  

As ekeage
She ee nee
“wae peeae
Fem etane
fos ee bee
eG anaes

saan
anaes
aeeee
anaae
wn nee
ee a

quate ae
a

r

tt hey wah

Pe eh ee ee ee!
eee eee
meee a ee
fepeaeer
vee wea
Maen ew ee
“pee

ol

 

few ee eee

     

]

 

Page 141
TOR SECRETICOMINFIREL-FO-UG A AUS-CAN- GBR AND NZEIRT

(U) The Other Purples

(U) Insome ways the battle against the
German military code and cipher systems was
easier than the one against Japan’s navy. The
Germans’ reliance on the Enigma allowed a con-
centration of cryptanalytic effort. Japan was not
as cooperative. Its military did not use either a
single code ora single encryption machine.
Although much was shared among Japan’s sys-
tems, the American and British codebreakers felt
they had to start from the beginning with each
new code, cipher, or communications subdivision
system they encountered.

€FSAAGD Despite the earlier successes against
the Purple enciphering machine and the insights
gained from prewar work on the Japanese navy’s
JN25 operational code, OP-20-G never had a
secure entry into any ofthe major Japanese sys-
tems.”

45/455 Some of the Japanese naval systems
yielded secrets more valuable than those gained
from Purple, but that information came at a great
cost. Even the rather old-fashioned code-plus-
additive systems were as or more difficult to enter
than Japan’s high-level diplomatic machine.
Japan’s habit of frequently changing code and
additive books compounded “G's” problems.

(FS//51) The Japanese navy used 184 systems
between December 1941 and the end ofthe war.
And some 1,000 different ciphers appeared on
them.” Triumphs in uncovering the underlying
logic of systems did not ensure they could be
read. An American cryptanalytic victory could be
reversed overnight bya change in additives or,
more permanently, bythe introduction of new
code books.

CBS4S8 Although the navy had its RAM
machines, tabulators, and the special “NC”
machines to help discover the structures of the
code and cipher systems, some ofthe most
important ones remained unreadable until the

Page 142

latter months of the war. One of the reasons why
OP-20-G hurriedly constructed so many relay,
plugboard, and Letterwriter combinations in late
1944 and 1945 was the need to immediately
exploit the systems that had taken solong to
enter.

(U) But even in 1942, the least resistant and
quickest technological path was the most rational
choice for a search for an Ultra in the Pacific. Only
when the tried-and-true technologies proved too
slow was there an attempt to use digital electron-
ics.

(U) Incertain instances, avoiding the risk
involved in applying electronics to the Japanese
problems led to machines that should have been
named after Rube Goldberg’s inventions, rather
than after snakes or jewels or flowers. The man-
date tostay ahead ofpossible changes in the
famous Japanese fleet operational code system,
JN25, the rush to exploit Japan’s long unreadable
strip-cipher system, and the search to identify
mysterious naval cipher machines led to some of
World War II’s most unusual cryptanalytic
machines. Viper, Python, Gypsy, Opal, Mamba,
and their relatives were clever throwbacks, but
still throwbacks.

(U) New Guys and Old Guys, New
Techniques and Old Insights

(U) After OP-20-G and GC&CS had reached
an agreement about the Enigma problem in early
fall 1942, the old-timers at“G,” such as Mrs.
Driscoll, were transferred back to the more famil-
iar Japanese puzzles. The German naval problem
essentially was turned over to Engstrom and his
team of bright but young and cryptanalytically
inexperienced “outsiders.” “G’s” leaders, such as
Joseph Wenger, thought that with all the mathe-
matical skills in “M,” with its advanced machines,
and with help from the British cryptanalysts,
their weak background in practical attack on sys-
tems could be overcome. *°

TOPSECRETICOMINTHREL“TC-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIDU
FOR-GEGRETHGCOMNTHREL-FO-U 64 -AUS-GAN-GER-AND-NEEHX 1

(¥84/5B The great American responsibility,
the Japanese cryptanalytic problem, was given to
“G’s” professional cryptanalysts and the naval
officers who had worked onthe Pacific tasks
before the war. They were in a separate subgroup,
“GYP,”®* which maintained a rather well-calculat-
ed distance from the young men working under
Howard Engstrom. There was another group in
Hawaii which continued on with its earlier work.
The British frequently gave cryptanalytic advice
and sent intercepts to both centers and tothe
cryptanalysts working in Australia.

GS+Sb Washington was where cryptanalyt-
icresearch and machine design were conducted
for both European and Asian problems. But being
inone center did not lead to agreement about
crypto-methods or hardware. Those working on
the Japanese problems had different perspectives
from the young men inthe “M” group. The dis-
tance between “M” and “P” included approaches
to cryptanalysis. “P” was not as enthusiastic about
abstract mathematical methods and RAMs as was
“M.” “P’s” cryptanalysts did accept the reality that
codebreaking had become amass _ production
operation, but they wanted tried-and-true meth-
ods and machinery, such as “differencing,” the
IBM equipment, and simple and reliable electro-
mechanical analog. 8?

€F84/SB Those preferences led to delays in
the design and construction of advanced
machines for the Pacific crypto-wars. “P’s” reluc-
tance toturn to new technologies was only one
reason for the delays. And it was only one ofthe
reasons for the many failures inthe Pacific
machine project. Technological barriers and the
difficult nature ofthe attacks against additive
code systems led toa string of well-intentioned
projects that were unable to produce machines of
the stature of the Enigma Bombes.

(U) A Matter of Machines and Control

€FS7/8B The differences over cryptanalytic
methodology led to some frictions between “M,”

TFOP-SEGREFIGOMNFHRELF0-U6A AUG -GAN-GER-AND NZX

which thought, like Hooper, that advanced statis-
tical methods were cures for all crypto-problems,
and the old hands in “P,” who trusted their long
experience with Japanese cryptologic systems.

FFSA4SB An example of the results of the dif-
ferent approaches to codebreaking came in fall
1943 when frustration over the inability to even
identify anew Japanese system led toa blunt
exchange between the two types. of
cryptanalysts.*? The frictions had been building
for some time, with “M’s” newcomers more than
suggesting that ona routine basis messages
should be run through the IC, Comparator, Tessie
machines, and the advanced tabulators to identi-
fy “busts” ormisuses of systems. By October
1943, suggestions about such routine “clinical”
procedures tofind “non-random” behavior in
new systems were turning into recriminations.

-FS//SB-There was a suggestion in late 1943
that unread systems always be given toa new

group separate from the “Y’s” cryptanalysts. The
proposed “GO” section would guarantee the
application ofall the new statistical methods to
the recalcitrant traffic, no matter its country of
origin or its underlying subject matter. It would,
ofcourse, take control over new systems away
from those who were immersed in operational
cryptanalytic and codebreaking attacks against
families of systems.

CFSAHASB The suggestion for setting up “GO”
did not have to wait long for a response.
Commander L. W. Parke, one of the more experi-
enced men inthe organization, replied with a
rather guarded criticism ofthe proposal. But it
included more than a hint that it was “cryptana-
lytic experience” rather than “casual observation”
that usually led to solutions. Parke soon became
much more direct.®

The author of the subject paper shows such a
lack of comprehension of what goes on in GY
that it [sic] does not deserve serious considera-

lion...As to the variation from random idea [sic]

Page 143
TOP SECRETHCONINTHREL~FO-USA-AUS-CAN_GRE AND NZ7U/X1

afar more profitable attack isto be found in
suecessive trials of known and probable meth-
ods of cncipherment. In other words eryptana-
lylic experience cannol be supplanted by casual
observers [sie] armed with machines and/or
degrees of higher leaming. The subject report is
typical of the ideas that have come from GM's
cryptanalytical research group during the past
year. Although afew ideas have been useful,
they were not worth the time spent in trying to
help GM personnel toa better understanding of
the problems involved in solving Japanese
naval ciphers.

CES4/SB Arejoinder to Parke’s criticism of
the intellectuals reached the desk of one of the
old-timers who, apparently, decided it was best to
mark the top of each page of the renewed propos-
al for “GO” with the words “GM BURN BEFORE
READING.”

CESS More than pride and turf wars were
involved in the tensions between the operational
and analytic types of cryptanalysts. At times the
differences in approaches led to serious interpre-
tive problems. The now relatively well-known
battle between the analysts inthe Pacific and
those in Washington over the JN25 additives was
only one of several conflicts.** A quite similar one
took place in the summer of 1942.

€FS+/SH The JN39 Japanese Merchant
Ship/Navy additive system was introduced in
August 1941 and was broken by the cryptanalytic
group in Hawaii. But understanding the system
did not mean instant success. The recovery of the
critical additives was progressing very slowly.
Then Washington decided that it would apply its
machines and analytic techniques to the problem.
It used its own method of machine “differencing”
to generate six times as many additives as Hawaii
was producing by hand. Washington insisted its
additives were correct.®”

CESS When code and additive books were
finally captured, it was learned than some three-

Page 144

quarters ofthe Washington machine-produced
additives were incorrect. Aretrospective onthe
problem found that the pure analytic and
machine methods were too simplistic and that
“speed” of processing was no substitute for such
vital activities as making sure that the recoveries
actually led to readable traffic.** The discovery
about the results of Washington’s machine attack
on “39” was linked to similar problems with its
work on JN25.

(U) Such incidents perhaps restrained the
operational cryptanalysts from requesting that
the “M” sections engineers create advanced
machines to help them break into the Japanese
codes and ciphers. Asa_ result, most ofthe
machines built for the “P” group followed in the
tradition of Purple, adirect analog toaid the
decryption process after a system had been solved
through traditional techniques.

(U) The Snake That Died Too Young, Viper

(U) Among the many frustrations “G” had to
endure was the struggle against what was thought
to be one of the most important Japanese cipher
systems. Inlate 1942 itappeared that the
Japanese navy might be on the verge of introduc-
ing anew cipher machine — one for the most
important naval officers and ships. Ithad the
potential to become another Purple for the
Americans, asingle machine-based system that
would be relatively easy to read once the nature of
the enciphering machine was established. The
Americans called the systern and machine Jade.

(U) There were, perhaps, some overly hopeful
fantasies at OP-20-G that Jade would soon
replace the Japanese Navy’s important opera-
tional code, JN25. That additive code was being
read, but with great effort and much worry. OP-
20-G always fretted that the next change in it
would be the one that permanently locked out the
allies.

TFOR-SEGRET/COMINTHREL-T6-UGA, AUS - Gi GER-AND Nz
“TOP SECRETICOMINTNREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND-NZLHKT

(U) JN157 (Jade) first appeared in December
1942. “G” could tell from messages on other sys-
tems that it was carrying very important high
command communications. But the frustrations
created bythe unsuccessful attack on another
Japanese cipher machine, Coral, led “G” to con-
clude that Jade was unbeatable. Until mid-1943
only minimal attention was paid to JN157

(+/+FOOF Then there were a series of very
lucky discoveries. Some busts were identified
which gave afew clues tothe nature ofthe Jade
machine and which pointed to sources for cribs.?°
The belief that itwas perhaps asolvable tele-
phone stepping-switch machine (like Purple),
and anincrease inthe amount of traffic onthe
system, led to a major attack on Jade.”

(IS//6bStatistical attacks were supplement-
ed with crib-based “menuing.” “G’s” engineers
lashed together a primitive stepping switch ver-
sion of a new bombe to aid in the search for daily
settings of the machine.” With the help of such
machines, the attack on Jade yielded results with-
in a few weeks.

(U) By October, 4,000 messages were being
read by the Americans each month. The messages
contained much about logistics and, later, many
intelligence items. The cryptanalysts at “G,”
impressed bythe high-level addresses on the
messages, anticipated that Jade would soon carry
the most important operational orders and would
become more significant than the unpredictable
JN25.

€£57/56 The optimism about the possibility
of conquering Jade had led to the speedy creation
ofthe Viper, an electromechanical analog of it,
and the construction of several handy crypto-
aids.°* To speed decryption ofall the messages,
several more copies of Viper were built. The later
models were quite advanced and expensive desk-
top automatic decipherers. Two copies were sent
to England.

(U) Viper was inthe tradition of Purple,
although Lawrence Steinhardt was its top design-
er. A special Kana electric keyboard was connect-
edto alarge bank of electric stepping switches,
relays, and plugboards. A Letterwriter typewriter
was at the other end and served as the printer for
the system. The Vipers looked much like the later
versions ofthe Purple analog. The Vipers saved
hundreds of very precious hours of analysts’ time.
But they were special-purpose machines.

(U) Because of the apparent value of JN157, a
major project was begun to create more than an
analog of the system. OP-20-G put the groups at
NCR towork designing an ultra-high-speed
“grenade” tospeed the final and most difficult
steps in discovering the keys to the Jade setups.
The machine was to be powerful enough to over-
come changes the Japanese might make to the
system.

(U) Unfortunately, although the Americans
continued to penetrate the JN157 Jade system, it
did not carry the expected high-level operational
messages. By early 1944, “G’s” investment was
not paying great returns. Then one ofthe great
disappointments of the war occurred.

(U) Jade turned out to be an experiment by
the Japanese, one that did not please them. The
Jade JN157 system was cancelled in mid-1944,
just asmore advanced cryptanalytic machines
to attack the system were being delivered to
OP-20-G."4

(U) It seemed that more than a year and one-
half of intense work had been wasted. In retro-
spect, however, it was decided that Jade had not
provided that much important information. So its
closing was not that critical from the operational
side. And the work on it did make something of a
secondary contribution to OP-20-G. It gave the
cryptanalysts hope that another system which
had resisted the most sophisticated attacks for
many years might finally be conquered. On the

Page 145
FOP-SEGRETIGOMINTHREL—-FO-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX4..

basis of the work on Jade, the Coral system proj-
ect was restarted.

(U) A Snake in Hand, Perhaps — Python

(U) Japan had placed naval attachés in many
of its embassies after World War 1. Their job was
to report on the capabilities and intentions of for-
eign navies. The Japanese hierarchy valued
their communications so much that the attaché
system was given one of the nation’s first encryp-
tion machines, the Red. With the onset of World
War II, the attachés assigned to the Axis nations
assumed an expanded role in Japan’s intelligence
system. Iftheir messages could be read bythe
Allies, they would provide insights into the plans
and the technical prowess ofall ofthe Axis pow-
ers.

C84/St) The attachés had many ciphers to
communicate with (eighty-three over the course
of the war), but two seemed of special importance
to the British and American cryptanalysts, JNA10
and JNA2o. They appeared to be the ones that
carried the most valuable information to and
from the attachés. The first was avery difficult
version of Japan’s many code-plus-additive sys-
tems; the other, the “G” and GC&CS teams dis-
covered, was anew type of cipher machine that
would not respond to the attacks that had broken
Red or Purple. They called their new adversary
“Coral.”

54/5) Through increased attention to the
problem in Washington and England, the begin-
nings of an entry into JNA1o (the code and addi-
tive system) came inlate 1943. However, full
reading of all the links between the attachés and
Tokyo was delayed for many months because spe-
cial additive books had been assigned for com-
munications between foreign capitals and Japan.
They proved even more resistant to statistical
attacks than the standard additives.”

CES4H4SH There was elation when the fortu-
nate discovery of some cribs led JNA1o to open

Page 146

up to the Allies. The entry came too late to be of
value, however. JNA1o’s main use was for trans-
mission ofinformation gained through espi-
onage. By 1944 Japan’s spy networks had with-
ered, and the system yielded little information.

(U) However, the attack on JNAIO did give
some encouragement to those who had attempt-
edto read the much more important system,
JNA20-Coral. JNA20 had frustrated “G” for
many years. The navy needed a successful attack
against it because it was used to report important
technical information concerning all the military:
land, air, and sea. As significant, its transmissions
came from such vital points as Berlin and
Moscow.

CES445b JNA2o had along, long history, but
the Coral machine had first appeared in 1939
replacing the Red machine. It was soon distrib-
uted to all of Japan’s attachés. The revised JNA20
system immediately came to the attention of the
British. Although unable to read the traffic, they
continued to intercept messages throughout the
war. OP-20-G also took notice of the 1939 change
in JNA20, but it was unable to intercept enough
ofthe transmissions from Europe to Japan to
begin an attack. That put the Americans at a dis-
advantage compared to the British codebreakers;
in addition to the shortage of manpower, the lack
ofintercepts prevented the Americans from
acquiring the necessary cryptanalytic “depths.”

(U) The desire to penetrate Coral remained
high. Because OP-20-G had been reading Coral’s
predecessor, the Red machine, its officers real-
ized how significant the Coral was. As many men
and machines as could be safely taken off of other
systems, such as the one for Japanese naval oper-
ations, were assigned to the new attaché problem
in 1940.

(FSASR-“G” tried all the standard statistical
approaches. The messages that were available
were frequency analyzed to see if Coral had the
~TOR-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TOUSAAUS, CAN, GBR AND NZLIX1

same kind of statistical split between consonants
and vowels as the old Red and Purple machines. *

-ES+/6B Sadly, there was no return from the
investment before the summer of 1941. Even
then, the results were slim and less than encour-
aging. The time-consuming statistical tests
showed the analysts only that Coral’s inner work-
ings were not just slight variations on the old Red
machine. Coral, they knew, would bea _ very
demanding problem.

(U) The task seemed daunting, so resources
were shifted to other problems. However, when
workloads allowed, “G’s” analysts were encour-
aged toapply the most advanced methods to
uncover the fundamentals of Coral. Some signs of
progress appeared. They led tothe reestablish-
ment of a Coral program.

€PS4/SH Many different statistical analyses
and all the available RAM machines were applied
during the next two years. The new IC machine
was put to use, then Tessie. Some 100,000 mes-
sage letters were counted and matched, again and
again. Digraph counts and strip studies were
done to see if Coral was related to the Enigma.
Index of Coincidence tests were made on five
months’ worth of intercepts. Round Robin tests,
matching every message from aday with every
other, were made. A few prewar “obtained” plain
texts were also analyzed. Isomorphic runs were
done, and searches for tetragraphic repeats were
made using all the messages for July 1941. All
types of IBM tabulator indices were produced.
The British joined in with their own methods,
applying Turing’s advanced hypothesis-testing
concepts.

€48//SH The work in England and America
went on throughout 1942. But all that was deter-
mined was that Coral might be employing tele-
phone stepping switches, as did other Japanese
devices.

€45++65 The attack stopped again. The RAMs
and statistical techniques had let OP-20-G down.
It seemed fruitless to devote any more effort to
JNA20, despite the apparent value ofits mes-
sages. The situation seemed hopeless. There was
little possibility ofeither atheft ofa machine
(they were all inenemy territories) ora major
misuse of the system.

(U) The victory over JN157-Jade in fall 1943
led, however, to renewed interest in Coral. Based
on what was being learned about Jade, there was
a hunch that Coral was a Roman-letter version of
the JN157 machine. As soon as possible, the Jade
team was reassigned and ordered to beat Coral.%”

GS+45P They joined with their counterparts
in England on a six-month major statistical attack
that again called on all the RAM machines. The
goal was to reconstruct the wiring of the Coral
stepping switches. The work was intense, but lit-
tle came from it. By spring 1944 many were ready
to declare that Coral was unbeatable.
Mathematics again seemed unable to fulfill
Hooper’s promises.

<8+45B- Then, perhaps tothe embarrass-
ment ofthe mathematical types, anew member
of the Coral group decided to retry some cribs. He
asked atranslator to see ifhe could place them,
expecting not to hear from him for days, if not
weeks. Toeveryone’s surprise, the translator
returned within a hour with a report of success.
Then alonger crib was placed and the Coral
wirings were recovered.*°° In early March 1944
Coral was beaten and began to yield intelligence
treasures.*™

(U) “G” had already been preparing for the tri-
umph over Coral. The “M” group had been
ordered to start designing an analog well before
the break occurred. The result, the Python, was a
relatively crude, quickly built desktop cousin of
the Viper. Two Letterwriter typewriters were the

Page 147
 

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO USK AUS CAN, CBR AND NZOIKT

input and output mechanisms. Between them
was a plugboard and alarge bank of relays that
could be set to imitate the “wheels” and motions
of Coral.

(U)) Python was put to use in mid-1944, auto-
matically decrypting messages and helping to test
possible solutions to Coral settings. Several more
were built and served until the end ofthe war.
While relatively slow, the Pythons did their job
with the reliability that could not be expected
from more advanced and costly electronic
devices. It was soon helped bya special analysis
machine that had originally been built for the
abandoned Jade system.

CIS+/S) Supported by an ongoing statistical
attack suggested bythe British, and bya home-
grown crib method that broke daily keys, Coral
was made to yield some of the best intelligence of
the war. The cargo-carrying submarines that ran
high-priority material between Japan and
Germany became easy targets. The German
“buzz” bomb, radar, and other great secrets
became known tothe Allies through the reports
sent to Japan by the attaché in Berlin.

(U) That attaché did more for the Allies. He
gave a precise description ofall the defenses on
the French coast. In addition, his messages told
the Allies what the Germans thought about the
timing and location ofthe Allied invasion of
Europe.

(U) Of Strips and Stripper

(U) Japan did not trust cipher machines as
much as Germany did; it employed several rather
old-fashioned systems on many of its important
communications channels. Some of those primi-
tive systems caused as much trouble or more than
Enigma or Jade or Coral. One of Japan’s alterna-
tive encryption devices, JN87, led toas much
technological soul-searching at OP-20-G and
National Cash Register as had the cipher machine
problems.

Page 148

(U) The Americans had suspected that the
Japanese navy was going to initiate the use ofa
new shipboard encryption system in mid-1944.
But beyond a hint that it would be a sort of hand-
operated “strip” device, nothing was known.
When the Japanese began using the system, “G”
was unable to read any ofits messages. Then a
capture was made by Filipino troops. The instruc-
tion books and parts they seized in November
1944 were quickly sent to “G.” The captures and
analysis of JN87 intercepts led toa partial but
important solution by early December.

(U) JN87’s device was quite like the American
Navy’s own strip cipher. The ‘87 had a plastic
beard holding strips that had alphabets printed
on both sides. There was a stock of one hundred
two-sided strips to chose from. Thirty ata time
were placed inthe board, with their particular
vertical and horizontal arrangement set accord-
ing to complex specifications given ina book of
instructions.

FS The JN87-based fleet communications
became so numerous that hand deciphering was
an impossibility. Thousands ofintercepts began
to pile up; the backlog seemed to contain items of
importance. To solve the problem, “G” instructed
Lawrence Steinhardt to build a reliable machine
as quickly as possible. His design reflected how
little time he had to complete the analog. At least
he was able to show a sense of humor: he gave the
machine the name of the famous American strip-
tease dancer, Gypsy Rose Lee.***

48) The NCML’s engineers at NCR were given
the responsibility for construction. They worked
onthe control portion of Gypsy, a formidable
task. Ralph L. Palmer was in charge, and he was
determined that his team would overcome all the
difficulties. His crew worked double shifts and
stayed on the job through the Christmas holidays.
That allowed them to solder the required 40,000
connections in Gypsy’s-central cabinet. *°?
Meanwhile, the navy’s engineers and, perhaps,
some WAVES were wiring the many “strips”

FOR-SEGRETICOMINTIREL-TO-UGA-AUE-CAN-GBR-ANE NZI
FOP-GEGRETHCOMINFHREL-FO-UGA AUS -CAN-GBROAND-NZLHOH

(plugboards) as quickly as the cryptanalysts could
recover them from analysis of JN87 depths.

(F885 Both teams were successful. Gypsy
was inoperation amonth after it was ordered.
Unfortunately, just as Gypsy began its work, the
Japanese altered their system, and the boards
had to be rewired. The Washington unit became
very efficient atthat; the Japanese began to
change all the strips every three months or so.***

F5//8B Steinhardt’s Gypsy was a get-the-
job-done machine. It was alarge, 4,000-pound
relay, stepping-switch, and plugboard

happy career. Topaz and Mamba became exam-
ples of the danger of relying upon special-purpose
machines, even when they could be built quickly
with tried-and-true parts. Both Topaz and
Mamba arrived after their target problems had
disappeared.

(U) Topaz was quite similar to Gypsy in its
architecture and purpose. It was another huge
plugboard and relay combination for semiauto-
matic deciphering through removal ofthe influ-
ence of “strips.” But its task was abit different
than Gypsy’s. The “strips” used by the Japanese

 

combination that required acentral
control unit and five separate six-foot-
high bays. Each ofthe bays contained
five large plugboards. Each board was
hand-wired to represent four ofthe
JN87 strips. Because the strips were
two-sided, the Gypsy plugboards were
constructed to represent eight choices.

S4SD. The control unit had
switches to select the desired “strips”
and which oftheir sides were tobe
used. The Gypsy’s operator could also
automatically shift the “strips” and set
other crypto-variables. Banks of lights
signalled which boards and which off-
sets had been selected. Then the enci-
phered message was typed onthe
machine’s Kana input typewriter. If the
message was free of garbles and Gypsy
was correctly set, clear text was printed
on a Letterwriter typewriter. The JN87
messages seemed soimportant and
Gypsy so useful that another model was
ordered. It was to be used in Hawaii. It
was planned to have atape reader as
input to speed processing.

(U) Strips without Strippers

 

 

 

 

<8) Two other machines built for
“strip” problems did not have such a

—LOB-SECRETCOMINTUREL TOUS A BUS CARE RANDNZLIDG

ade ) Merba

Page 149
—FOR-SEGRETHGGMINTHREETC-USA, AUS; CAN GBR AND NZOIAT

on their navy merchant marine JN11 communica-
tions represented additives. JN11 was a superen-
ciphered code system and avery important one
which often served as the window into Japanese

communications when other codes were unread-
able.

(U) Topaz was clever. It removed the additives
and printed the resulting code. But the two mod-
els of Topaz were rarely used. They arrived too
late to be employed on current JN11 traffic, and,
despite their being modified to work onthe
famous JN25 system, their short lives were spent
working on old JN11 messages. *”

One ofthe most unusual machines that
OP-20-G brought into its RAM collection was
Mamba. It combined IBM cards, relay circuits,
and analog decision making ina _five-foot-high
metal cabinet. It looked like a friendly, many-eyed
monster because of its two round signal lights and
its small voltage meters.'’°*

8) Mamba’s unique feature was its input sys-
tem, an electromechanical card scanner. Located
ona shelf at the center of the machine, the scan-
ner shifted IBM cards holding cipher over a set of
others punched for key. Mamba sensed how
many ofthe 2,400 tiny metal brushes (ten digits
in eighty columns in three cards) made contact as
the message cards were moved, column by col-
umn, over the key cards. Mamba’s goal was to
exploit a weakness in many of the Japanese code
systems, one that had become important to the
American attacks. All legitimate code groups were
evenly divisible by three.

(} Mamba’s electrical weighting component
could be set to stop the machine when accumu-
lated “scores” exceeded a threshold value. When
enough ofthe brushes made contact through
coincident holes in the cards, the scanner’s power
was cut off. Once the machine stopped, its opera-
tors recorded the source of the “hits” by hand.

Page 150

+S) Although relatively crude, and useful only
when the cryptanalysts had a good idea of which
page of additives had been applied to a message,
Mamba seemed so promising that two were con-
structed at NCR. They were delivered to the navy
in the last days of 1944.

+U/+4+FOUR) It was expected that Mamba
would vastly reduce the amount ofhand work
needed for the JN11 system. But the Mambas
arrived after the specific system they were
designed for “died.” To salvage some ofthe
investment, at least one was modified to perform
what was called a “maximal-minimal” attack on
JN25."°

(U) The Attack on the Many JN25s

(U) The new automatic  enciphering
machines, such as the Enigma, Jade, and Coral,
have been crypto-historians’ favorites. The
machines and the attack on them have an inher-
ent attraction. The mechanical complexities are
fascinating, and the logic of the attacks are intel-
lectually challenging. In addition, the machines
that were built to fight them, the Bombes and the
Colossi, are symbols ofthe coming ofthe new
information age. The Bombes and Colossi are also
physical reminders of how difficult codebreaking
had become by the 1940s.

(U) But more important in terms of the war in
the Pacific than the automatic enciphering
machines were old-fashioned systems, such as
the Japanese Fleet General-Purpose Code, and
JN25. Codes like “25” proved as or more difficult
to penetrate than machine ciphers. JN25, an

' additive system, took so much effort that a special

and very large “G” cryptanalytic group was creat-
ed early in the war.

(U) In Washington alone, some 800 people
were working on “25.” "° By the later months of
1943, Howard Engstrom’s “M” group became
—FOP-GEGREF/GCOMINFHREL-TFO-U GAAS -GAN-OBROANE- NZL

involved. It began to devote much of its time to
finding practical designs for very, very rapid
machines with enormous amounts of memory to
handle the special demands of the JN25 problem.

(U) Because of the special challenges posed by
code systems, “G” was unable to create an equiv-
alent tothe Bombe for the Japanese codes. And
they were unable to devise electronic devices. “M”
had toconcentrate oncreating “memory”
machines from what was technologically at hand.
Although compromises, the machines they came
up with promised to be more productive than the
standard tabulators, the navy’s NC machines, or
the relay-tabulator Slide Run machines that were
used by the army.™*

448) JN25 was a difficult problem for several
reasons. The primary one was the general nature
of well-fashioned code plus additive systems.
They left analysts awash in unknowns, forcing
them to grab at cryptanalytic straws to make any
progress. Although codes can be analyzed
through frequency tests quite similar to those
used on the distributions ofletters in cipher sys-
tems, doing sois quite demanding and usually
yields less rewarding answers. Counts of code
groups in large collections of messages can yield
good pointers to frequently used words ina lan-
guage, such as “to” or “the,” and to word combi-
nations typically found in military messages such
as “Fleet orders.”

¢€¥8} Identifying one group can help find the
meaning of another. But codes with thousands of
groups, several of which stand for the same plain
language word, usually do not open up as a result
of frequency tests.

(U) The frustrations involved intrying to
solve a code system without the aid of captures or
operator errors grow exponentially when the
underlying codes are themselves enciphered.
Adding or subtracting numbers tends to mask the
frequencies of the code groups. Ifthe “additives”
are from along list or, worse, are randomly gen-

—FOP-SEGRETIGOMINTHREL -TFO-UGA-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLHXI—

erated, there is little chance of removing their
influence.

(U) Additive systems have been in use around
the world for generations, and attacks on them
began when they first appeared. Some very com-
plex methods had been developed to help identi-
fy additives. Attacks such as “differencing” were
relatively freestanding. Tobegin the arduous
process of rounds of subtraction and cycle analy-
sis, differencing only asked for messages that
were in “depth.” But much depth was required.
Differencing needed bulk cipher-text that was
known to have been enciphered with the same
key. But the method had at least the potential for
automation. **

(U) Incontrast to differencing, most other
approaches were based on common sense, were
difficult to automate, and were useful only after
some significant breakthroughs into the additive
and code systems had been achieved. A frequent-
ly used one was to assume that some additives
were known, then subtract them from the cipher,
then match the resulting plain code against a long
list of known and highly frequent code groups. If
a match, or a significant number of matches, was
found, additional effort was invested in produc-
ing aplain text and increasing the list of known
code groups.

(U) Other methods demanded the use of very
experienced codebreakers. They required knowl-
edge of military systems and a craftsman’s insight
once additives had been removed. For example,
an analyst might begin his attack by assuming
that previously known stereotyped phrases or
usages were inthe messages. After seeing if his
intuition led to an interpretation that made sense,
a tentative meaning would be assigned toa code
group. Then other messages would be searched to
double check the hunch. Ifconsistency was
found, many messages would be processed in
order to construct a file of appropriately weighted
“high frequency” code groups. That file would be
checked and updated in an endless cycle as it was

Page 151
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA: AUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZLHK4—

used to see if correct additives had been discov-
ered, and to see if meanings could be attached to
more of the recovered numeric codes.

(U) The Americans had used all those meth-
ods inthe 1920s and 1930s, and they applied
them to Japan’s World War II systems. But JN25
had its own particular difficulties, ones that chal-
lenged the traditional attacks. First, it had avery
lengthy code book. Its first one, of 1939, con-
tained over 30,000 groups; later versions had
more than 50,000 ofthe five-digit codes. That
meant that even when aclear code group was
intercepted, its meaning was very difficult to
determine. More than one code number might
stand for the same word or phrase. In addition,
the Americans thought they might be facing a sys-
tem in which one code group could have different
meanings depending upon context.

(U) None ofthe old cryptanalytic standbys
appeared in JN25’s early years. Unfortunately for
“G,” JN25 code books were not “obtained,” there
were few operator mistakes, and OP-20-G was
unable to discover many cases in which aJN25
message was sent ona system that was being
read. The only recourse OP-20-G had was to try
tointensify the application ofthe tedious and
frustrating traditional attacks it had used before
the war.

(U) The Japanese did not make things easy
for “G,” although they did employ afew tech-
niques that deviated from the rule of random-
ness. One of the errors the Japanese made, but an
important one, was to facilitate the detection of
garbled messages by making legitimate code
groups divisible by three. "? The use of that “pat-
tern” vastly reduced the number oftrue code
groups the Americans had to identify, and it also
eased the search for additives.

(U) The Americans had achieved some bril-
liant but temporary successes against JN25 using
old-fashioned hand methods supplemented by
the IBM tabulators. Enough of JN25 was under-

Page 152

stood in mid-1942 to give “G” its first great tri-
umph." With only a handful of people and a few
tabulating machines, “G’s” branch in Hawaii was
able to contribute vital information on the com-
ing Midway and Coral Sea battles. The contribu-
tion was marked by controversy, however.

(U) The analysts in the Pacific had disagreed
with the conclusions by “G’s” experts in
Washington about the correct interpretation of
the codes and additives. The analytic group in
Hawaii had faith in “experience” while
Washington relied more upon formal analytic
methods. Unfortunately for the chief analyst in
Hawaii, Joseph J. Rochefort, being correct about
the contents of JN25 did not prevent him from
being disciplined for deviating from prescribed
reporting practices. "5

tTS77SDP But there was much in the JN25 sys-
tems that made them very, very difficult. The
codes were hidden bythe use of nearly random
additives that were contained inlengthy books.
The first of the additive books had 300 pages,
each holding 100 five-digit numbers. A complex
and very opaque indicator system was employed
to communicate which page and which starting
point were tobe used for amessage. All JN25
indicators were scrambled in one way or another,
and their encryption algorithms were frequently
changed.

(U) More than indicator systems were altered
to thwart cryptanalysis. During the first two years
of its life, the JN25 code was replaced once and
the additive books were changed six times. The
replacement ofthe additive books continued
throughout the war. Worse, the code itself was
changed at very critical moments. That meant the
need to reconstruct the code meanings all over
again. When the Japanese changed additives,
codes, and indicator systems all at the same time,
itwas devastating for the Americans. That was
the reaction in1944 when there was a total
change in “25.”

FOP-SECRETHCGMINTHREL-FO-USA- AUS CAN-CBR AND NZD
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZUIXT

+<F5//8P Despite all the experience it had
gained, in mid-1944 “G” worried that it might
never reenter JN25. Only errors on the less valu-
able JN1i systems allowed itinto operational
messages while its crew frantically tried to deter-
mine the meanings of the thousands of new “25”
codegroups.”°

(U) The difficulties caused bythe JN25 sys-
tem changes were multiplied asthe Japanese
divided the “25” system into more and more sep-
arate networks or “channels.” Each had its own
procedures. Entry into one was not a guarantee
that others would be read.

(U) The Comparators That Weren't: the
Copperhead Proposals and the Victory of
Electromechanics

¢S) It had become clear to OP-20-G and the
SIS, which was tackling similar problems, that
automation was needed to handle the Japanese
codes. The first responses were predictable. Both
the army and navy turned to mechanics, tabula-
tors, and relay devices. The SIS engineers and
their allies at IBM extended the reach of the relay
tabulator combinations through the Slide-Run
machines. “G” counted on similar devices until
“M” began to involve itself with JN25. It recom-
mended the construction ofa host of permuta-
tions of Bush’s ideas. Unfortunately, only one was
accepted, and it evolved into a punch tape, not a
microfilm machine.

(S}-The navy had asked the practical engi-
neers at the Navy Yard under Don Seiler for help
fighting code systems before the war began. By
1940 he built a fifty-wheel cam and gear device
that was driven by hand cranks. It tested cipher
and additives for divisibility by three.”” The next
response by both the army and navy was to mod-
ify the tabulators. The goal was to speed up the
false subtraction processes used in both differ-
encing and additive stripping. The navy’s NC
machines began arriving before the war broke
out, and the army quickly drafted plans for its

—TOP-SECREFICOMINTHREL—TFO-VEA-AUS-CAN GBR AND NZLIXt

Slide Run machines. Those combinations of com-
plex relay boxes and tabulator equipment were
difficult to build, however, and did not come into
operation until the last months of 1943.""*

(S} OP-20-GM’s team wanted to create
machines faster and much more powerful than
the NCs orthe Slide Run devices. Lawrence
Steinhardt was given the responsibility. He
helped draft aseries of proposals in mid-1942.
Each fit with his and John Howard’s previous
work at MIT. While the designs were being
mulled over, Steinhardt rescued the idea that film
and photoelectric technology could be used for
frequency tests against JN25. Apparently such a
hope had almost been killed in early 1942."°

63 One ofthe first challenges Howard
Engstrom had presented to Eastman-Kodak was
to produce a machine for additive code systems.
With the ex-IBM engineer John Skinner acting as
the liaison, Eastman quickly arrived at an ambi-
tious design for an“automatic decoder.” The
device was to strip additives, locate the plain code
in alarge dictionary, and set down the meaning of
the code. Eastman was not sure whether elec-
tronics or older technologies would be used to do
the stripping; but it was committed to developing
optical discs to store the code meanings and toa
fast-flash system to print the results. To “G’s” dis-
appointment, just as Engstrom thought of asking
Eastman to prepare a detailed design, the compa-
ny announced it was too busy with the IC and
Tessie projects. **°

(87 Given the difficulties at Eastman,
Engstrom turned to Lawrence Steinhardt." He
handed him the responsibility for the additive
systems. Hebegan exploring machine alterna-
tives in mid-1942. But he was not allowed the
opportunity toturn his general ideas into
specifics until mid-1943. The Atlantic problem
took all of “M’s” resources until then.

(S$) Steinhardt’s initial suggestions relied
upon Bush’s favored technologies. They were

Page 153
FOPR-SEGREHIGOMINTHRE:--TO-UGA-AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZL//X1

sometimes referred to as the Copperhead propos-
als. The first ofthem was for a photo-optical
machine that was to be a high-speed replacement
of Seiler’s device. It was to have base-three tube
ring counters. Its job was to subtract suspected
additives code groups found in messages already
aligned in depth. Its goal was to point to the most
likely additives through the “divisible-by-three”
criterion. It took a year after the initial sketch to
produce adetailed design. Then when it was
examined, it was abandoned, declared to be too
electronically adventuresome.

“%~S) The next plan, also envisioning photo-
optical technology, was more architecturally
ambitious. It was intended toautomate the
sophisticated method of“Jeeping.” Itwas a
means of identifying likely additives and then
code groups. “Jeeping” was an extension ofthe
differencing method; an extension that called for
a large amount of high-speed memory and near-
endless rounds of running messages against each
other. Itwas based onthe probability that if
cipher texts that had been enciphered with the
same “keys” were subtracted from each other, an
identifiable “difference” would lead to plain code
and correct additives. The difference could be
checked against a huge catalog containing all the
possible differences between high frequency code
groups ina system. “Jeeping” was a valuable
method, but itsoaked uphours ofeffort to
process just a few “differences.”

€S) Although “Jeeping” was amethod that
should have been automated, the photo-optical
machine, with the high-speed photographic
reproduction of hits that itdemanded, was too
much for “M.” The detailed mid-1943 plan for the
proposed Mark Il was shelved. Even a simplified
version, without automatic recording, was aban-
doned.

(S.Bush’s fundamentals received another set-
back when Copperhead II was rejected as too

Page 154

complicated. It was a film version ofa Slide Run
machine. Its job was to subtract known additives
ina system from masses of cipher text, then run
the results against a huge file of already known
high-frequency plain codes. Ifenough matches
resulted, the machine was to issue asignal and
record the hit. With that information, an analyst
could align more text and add tothe files of
known additives and codes.**3

8} Even areduced version of Copperhead
was rejected. The Mark V was to have asmaller
“memory,” although its matching decisions were
tobe based ona complex weighting system
derived from studies of language and code fre-
quencies. The debates over the merits of those
“Hall” and “Shinn” weights may have been one
reason why the Mark V was not completed.

¢$). The only one of Steinhardt’s designs that
was accepted and turned into hardware was
Copperhead J. And its technology was a major
compromise. It became apunched tape, not a
film machine. That it was built at all is an indica-
tion of how much JN25 worried the cryptana-
lysts.'*4

£$)- Copperhead Iwas adevice toaid them
when they had no entry into a system. It was an
embodiment of a “Brute Force” method that was
used in moments of desperation. Its purpose was
to fill the void when the cryptanalysts did not
have enough recovered additive or code values to
even begin using tools such as differencing or
“Jeeping.” Alarge volume of cipher text was run
inthe hopes of finding “double repeats” which
would indicate which messages and their offsets
were indepth. Adouble repeat was when the
same two encrypted code values appeared in two
texts at the same distance apart from each other.
It was calculated that locating such matches vast-
ly increased the probability that a depth had been
found.?5
FORSEGRET/COMINTHREL—FO-UGAAUG-GAN-OBROANE-NZEHE

(U) Beyond the Copperheads — the JN25
Crisis and “M’s” Response

€FS4+45H Howard Engstrom would have
ordered Lawrence Steinhardt toturn to other
problems after the Copperhead defeats, but there
were signs that JN25 and other Japanese additive
systems were undergoing aseries of changes.
There was fear they might become unreadable.
High-speed machines to meet the new Japanese
challenges seemed essential. Asa __ result,
Steinhardt was ordered to explore all types of
alternatives to Bush’s favored technologies.

CESHSB As Steinhardt searched for new pos-
sibilities, including digital electronics, other engi-
neers at SIS and “M” moved towards electronic
solutions to German challenges. Like Steinhardt,
they were pushed bycryptanalytic needs that
could not possibly be met with the older tech-
nologies. By 1944 both the army and navy were
moving far beyond the original Bombes and
Bush’s Comparator. '*°

Notes

1.(U) Bradley F.Smith’s The Codebreakers War,
(Novato: Presidio Press, 1993) details the struggles of
the army to gain entry into Ultra.

2. (FSA48D NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Washington E
Traffic, Notes on Correspondence” circa February
1942. €FS4¢48]) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Green Analog,”
May, 1953. Amost important source showing the con-
centrated work SIS did on the complex German diplo-
matic systems isfound in (484481) NSA CCH Series
XH Z, “History, Machine Branch,” np. nd. 6784459
NSA CCH Series IV B-1-11, “History ofthe Signal
Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine Branch,”
October 29, 1947.

3. 8745D NSA AHA ACC 16844. “History of the
Special Projects Branch, SIS ETOUSA.”

4.(U) NSA release, Theodore M. Hannah, “Frank
B. Rowlett: A Personal Profile,” 522. NARA RG457,
SRH-004, “The Friedman Lectures on Cryptology.”

FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREE-T6-UGAAUS--CAN-GBROANE-NZEI I —

5. (U) Thomas Parrish, The Ultra Americans: The
United States’ Role in Breaking the Nazi Code (New
York: Stein & Day, 1987), 45.

6.(U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency,” Volume II, 82, and SRH-362,
“History ofthe SSA Vol. Ill, The Japanese Army
Problems: Cryptanalysis, 1942-1945.” Edward J. Drea,
MacArthur's Ultra (University of Kansas Press, 1992),
10. NARA RG457, SRH-145, “Collection of
Memoranda on Operations of SIS Intercept Activities
and Dissemination 1942-1945,” 01, and SRH-361,
“History of the SSA,” Vol. II, 250, 272. Ronald Lewin,
The American Magic, 38 (New York: Farrar-Strauss,
1982). €64455H- NSA CCH Oral History Interview
OH 04-82 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

7.(U) NARA RG457, SRH-004, “The Friedman
Lectures on Cryptology,” 171.

8.(U) Cipher A.Deavours and Louis Kruh,
Machine Cryptography and Modern Cryptanalysis
(Dedham, Massachusetts Artech House, 1985), 238.
NARA RG457, SRH-305, “The Undeclared War: The
History of RI,” 15 November 1943, by Laurance F.
Safford, Captain, U.S. Navy, and SRH-159,
“Preliminary Historical Report of the Solution of the B
Machine.”

9.(U) Edward J. Drea, MacArthur’s Ultra
(Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1992), xii,
61-2.

10. (U) Again, the documents found in the Garland
Covert Warfare series are most rewarding. See
“History of 3-US,” 010-026, and “Origins, Functions
and Problems of the Special Branch, MI.” Useful back-
ground onarmy intelligence isin Bruce W. Bidwell,
History ofthe Military Intelligence Division,
Department ofthe Army General Staff: 1775-1941,
(University Publications of America, nd).

11. &} NSA RAM File, June 23, 1943, OP-20-G to
OP-20, “Army has agreed to tell England too much.”
NARA RG457, SRH-349, “Achievements of the SSA In
World War II,” 31, and SRH-361, “History of the Sig-
nal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 11-22, 250, 276-283.

“XSKNSA CCH Series XII Z, “History of GET (TUNNY)
Research.”

12. (U) Edward J. Drea, MacArthur’s Ultra

(Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1992), xii.

Page 155
“FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-U9A-AUS-CAN-GBR- AND NZDT

Geoffrey Ballard, On Ultra Active Service (Rich-
mond, Australia: Spectrum Publications, 1991), 194-
231,

13. 68} Perhaps it was SIS’s first failure with Freak
that led Joseph Desch to accept the design for Mike,
the huge mechanical counter NCR built later in the
war. (3-NSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of RAM
Equipment, 1945.

14.¢8} Perhaps it was SIS’s first failure with Freak
that led Joseph Desch to accept the design for Mike,
the huge mechanical counter NCR built later in the
war, f[0058].

15. (F576) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“M.A.C.
Outlines #11, Freak.” ¢FS} NSA CCH 1IX.B.1.9, SSA,
“History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine,
History ofthe Development Branch,” 10 February
1953.

16. (U) The use of condensers for such storage
was “in the air” at the time, including at MIT, and sim-
ilar systems were used in the ENIAC.

17. (8+46) The seven condensers could hold 128,
but Freak counted only upto 99. 4S+/St NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “M.A.C. Outlines #11, Freak.”

18. £5) Many ofthe storage uses of condensers
were based upon setting constant values by hand.
Thus, Freak was quite an adventure.

19. f&) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Freak I,” May 1953.

20. 8) NSA CCH 1X.B.1.9, SSA, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine, History of the
Development Branch,” 10 February 1953, 83.

21. (FS46Q. NARA RG457, SRH-349, “Achieve-
ments of the SSA In World War II,” 18. University of
Pennsylvania Van Pelt Library Archives, Papers of
John Mauchly, 2B-10:a 209, 14, October 11, 1945 and
April 14, 1945 “Visit to SIS and Cryptologic Problems.”
NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History ofthe Signal
Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 237. G8A‘61) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “History, Machine Branch,” np. nd.
(45/75 NSA CCH Series IV B-1-11, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine
Branch,” October 29, 1947.

22. (F5+/68 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History,
Machine Branch,” np. nd., 30-37.

23. (ZS) NSA CCH Series TV, V 10.6, Chief Signal
Officer, “A Chronology of the Cooperation Between the

Page 156

SSA and the London Office of GCCS,” 2June 1946.
+F545R NSA CCH Series XH Z, “Washington E
Traffic, Notes on Correspondence” circa February
1942. (FS4455-NSA CCH Series IV B-1-11, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine
Branch, October 29, 1947.

24.¢F6/41) NSA CCD Series TV B-1-11, “History
of the Signal Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine
Branch,” October 29, 1947, 84.

25. (FS48]2) NSA CCD Series IV B-1-11, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume 11, The Machine
Branch,” October 29, 1947, 22-23, 88. FF&+‘5R NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “History, Machine Branch,” np.
nd., 24.

26. (FS) NSA CCH Series IVB, “History of ASA
Equipment (Development Branch) History,”
December 1942, 30 June 1944.

27. F845) f[qo2u] (AS44568 NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “History, Machine Branch,” np. nd., 51, 62.

28. S++) NSA Series XII Z, MAC Outlines,
“The Slide Run Machine.”

29. (F87/8T) NSA Series XII Z,MAC Outlines,
“The Slide Run Machine.” €654/65 NSA CCH Series
IV B-1-11, “History ofthe Signal Security Agency,
Volume 11, The Machine Branch,” October 29, 1947.
The first “F’-built machines had two cabinets.

30. (F5//58 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. Other relay-tab
combinations such asthe JMA and the “deciphering
machine” were built by SIS to perform similar tasks for
additive systems.

31. SSB NSA CCH Series XII Z, MAC Outline
#4, “The Slide Run Machine.”

32. (PS47/3T) NSA CCH Series I1Z, MAC Outline
#4, “Slide Run Machine.”

33. £8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “SSA
Proposal for 7omm Film I. C. Machine,” 8 June 1945.

34. FSD) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History
ofthe Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The
General Cryptanalytic Problem,” 272.

35. (FS} NARA RG457, SRMAo11, “Senior Staff
Meeting Notes,” August 18, 1942, Friedman memoran-
dum “Establish Section F.” David J. Crawford, The
Autoscritcher and the Superscritcher, forthcoming.
The Annals of the History of Computing illustrates the
advanced technical achievements of “F.” In fact, “F”

-FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL-TO-UGA, AUS CAN GBR ANE NZ EINE
TORSECRETICOMINTHREL10-U6A--AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHA—

may have forged a bit ahead of OP-20-G in respect to
the use of digital electronics. One reason may have
been that “F” was under less pressure to solve imme-
diate cryptologic crises. Again, NSA SRH-391, “U. S.
Cryptologic History,” contains dates somewhat differ-
ent than those found inRAM file documents and
other relevant SRH volumes. (fS} ASA CCH Series IV
B, “History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942 —-30 June 1944.” (87738D
NSA CCH Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982, 96.

36. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 287.

37. (FS44S9 NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 272.

38. 4S4/5B NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 258.

39. (U) NSA SRH-391, “U. S. Cryptologic History,”
120, provides a hint that the SIS’s relay machine may
have first been explored by the British and shown to
the Americans under direct order from Churchill.
Other sources, such asa letter from George Stibitz to
the author, suggest the relay machine was an
American idea.

40. FS/+/5P- NSA RAM File, J.N. Wenger to
OP-20-G, September 3, 1942, “Part Ilof Report of
J.N. Wenger, Capt. USN,” 1. Letter to the author from
George R. Stibitz, June 7,1987. NSA RG457,
SRH-361, “History ofthe Signal Security Agency,”
250, 257, 272-3. Atleast one source claims that the
American army's cryptologists were informed of and
worked onthe FISH traffic asearly as August 1942.
That source also claims that some machines were built
in America for the automated solution of that binary
system. However, there is no claim that the army built
anything like the Colossus for the problem. See NARA
RG457, SRH-349, “Achievements ofthe SSA In
World War II,” 18.

’ 41. 6} Rosen did not lose faith in electronic solu-
tions. In June 1943 he suggested amachine solution
for the commercial Enigmas that would include a
frame from the relay Madame X bombe and as many
as fifty-two “counters” made of vacuum tubes.

FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL—-FO-UGA-AUE-GAN-GBROAND-NZLG—

(5+ NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert o. Ferner, “Rapid
Analytic Machinery Needed for Research,” June 3,
1943.

42. (P3775 NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 258. €F5}+ NSA CCH Series IV
B, “History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942-30 June 1944. f[4221]. The
contract with Western Electric was for only about
$2,000. The F branch annual report for 1944 listed a
project for a high-speed rotor for the period May —
November 1944. 6S} NSA CCH Series XII Z, Annual
Reports, Development Branch, 1943-4.

43. 4484455 NARA RG227, Box 73, February 29,
1944, Stibitz to NDRC, “Secrecy re NCR product.”
Williams went on to build many huge relay computers
for the military ordnance groups during World War II,
and he designed and patented an electronic computer.
Michael R. Williams, A History of Computing
Technology (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-
Hall, 1985), 225-240. Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 1825, Honeywell vu Sperry-Rand _, Trial
Records, February, 1942,.S.B. Williams to NDRC,
“Fire control proposal,” and Reports on Electronic
Computer Designs by S. B. Williams, November 1941,
January 1942, March 13, 1942. NSA RAM File,
September 3,1942, “Wenger toOP-20-G, bombe
project;” September 9,1942, “Machine Research
Section (F)’; “Part II of Report of J. N. Wenger, Capt.
USN,” 1and October 10, 1942, “Enigma Machine
Contract.” Letter to the author from George R. Stibitz,
June 7,1987. The army’s single machine cost over
$1,000,000. NSA RG457, SRH361, “History of the
Signal Security Agency,” 257, 272-3. NARA RG457,
SRH-349, “Achievements of the SSA In World War II,”
29. NARA RG457, SRH-61, “History ofthe Signal
Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 251.

44. 6SA4485 NSA CCH Series XII Z,OP-20-G
“Memoranda on Bombe and the relationship of the
U.S. and U.K.,” cirea 1943. In addition to not fulfill-
ing all the expectations of automatic setups, 003 did
not incorporate some features suggested after its first
design was set. In mid-1943 one of the SIS cryptana-
lysts suggested that a Madame X frame be combined
with electronic counters to allow a purely statistical

Page 157
—FOR-SECRETHICOMNTHREL—FO-UGA aE -CAN-OBR ANE NZX

attack. Alater machine, the SIS Dudbuster did have
something like that configuration, but it became a sep-
arate machine, not an integral part of 003. NSA
CCH Series XII Z, Robert 0. Ferner, “Rapid Analytic
Machinery Needed for Research,” June 3, 1943.
Technical details of 003 may befound inan early
report, (3 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “X-68003, Bell
Laboratories Report, April 2, 1943."*3/7SB NSA CCH
Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.
Snyder, 24 February 1982..

45-413/88 After some experience with the 003, a
menu with a sure crib of twelve letters was considered
useful although it would produce more false hits than
astrong menu of fifteen or so letters

46. 54/68 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982.

47. (FSA/46B NSA CCH Series XII Z(S-2568),
“Tentative Brief Descriptions of Cryptanalytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” circa 1945.

48. 84/8) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 265. (FS) (S2568) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “Tentative Brief Description of General
Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March,
1945. () NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic
Report #2: The Yellow Machine,” 3, 54.

49. €F54458 NSA RAM File, February 21,1944,
W.A Wright to OP-20-G, “Comparison of Army and
Navy Enigma Equipment,” and January 18, 1943, to
OP-20-G/da, “Report of Meeting on Army Bombe.”

50. (8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic
Report #2: The Yellow Machine,” 50-52.

51.€797/8H NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 265. For insight into how
much SIS had learned about Enigma methods by the
end of 1943, see (3 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The Yellow Machine,”
especially pages 31and 35. These suggest that the
British had developed their own “machine guns.”
(P3¢7SB NSA CCH Local Archive, “Army-Navy
Descriptive Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,” Army
Security Agency, February 1947.-$- NSA AHA ACC
16890N, “Bombe Operations, Control, and Testing,
Duds and Railway E.”

Page 158

52. (FS7SB-NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 265-3) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, “Cryptanalytic Report #2: The Yellow Machine,” 35.

53. €F NSA AHA ACC 16890N “Bombe
Operations, Control, and Testing, Duds and Railway
E.”

54. @84/S8H NSA AHA 16331, “68i2th Signal
Security Detachment (PROV) Apo 413 Army,”
15 June 1945, 35. €8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Cryptanalytic Report #2: The Yellow Machine,” 40.

55. (F54455 NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 265.

56. GSA NSA CCH Series XII Z,LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years.

57.8) The SIS cryptanalysts, Ferner and Small,
worked onseveral statistical and technological
approaches toa “Dudbuster.” <8) NSA CCH Series XII
Z, “Cryptanalytic Report #2: The Yellow Machine.”
fS NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert O. Ferner,
“Rapid Analytic Machinery Needed for Research,”
June 3, 1943.

58. S455 NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & CS.
Naval SIGINT. Vol III, German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution,” 204.

59. (P8//SH NSA CCH Series XII Z,copies of
various MAC Outlines, circa 1953, MAC Outline # 12,
“The Arlington Dudbuster.”

60. (37 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert o. Ferner,
“Rapid Analytic Machinery Needed for Research,”
June 3, 1943.

61.445,43D NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems,” 266. 6FS} (S2568) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “Tentative Brief Description of General
Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March,
1945.

62. (FS44SD NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, “History
ofthe Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The
General Cryptanalytic Problem,” 266.

63. (FS+455- NSA CCH Series XII Z,LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years.
FOP-GEGREFICOMINFHREL-FO-U64-AUG-GAN-GEROANDNZEHE-

64. €P877ST) NSA AHA ACC 13657, “G.C. & C.S.
Naval SIGINT, Vol Ill, “German Cryptographic
Systems and Their Solution.”

65. (FS) (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Tentative Brief Description of General Analytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March, 1945.
(STNSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic Report #2:
The Yellow Machine,” 52.

66. (U) NSA RAM File, Part ILof Report toJ. N.
Wenger, Capt. USN, “Resume ofthe Dayton, Ohio
Activity During World War II,” and “History of NCML
and OP-20-G-4E, June, 1944,” “n530 bombes in oper-
ation.”

67. 475) NSA AHA ACC 35701 “History of the
Bombe Project,” 16 February 1946.

68. €FS7/St) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations,
DNC(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on
the German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944 [sic]. On
Britain’s request to SIS to build a Bombe and to build
analog of the “G” machine, €FS) ASA CCH Series IV B,
“History of ASA Equipment (Development Branch)
History, December 1942,” 30 June 1944, 42-44

69. C5481] NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems.” €94/8 NSA AHA ACC
16844. “History ofthe Special Projects Branch, SIS
ETOUSA.” tS} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic
Report #2: The Yellow Machine,” 44.

70. (FS. NSA AHA 35529, Friedman to
Corderman, 29 March, 1944, “Comparison of our
“003” type of “Bombe” with the rotary type.”

71. (3) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Annual Reports,
Development Branch, 1943-4.

72. (U) F.H. Hinsley, British Intelligence in the
Second World War, Volume I (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1979), 58. NARA RG457, SRH-361,
“History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two,
The General Cryptanalytic Problem,” 15, 243, 269, 277.

73. (U) David J. Crawford, The Autoseritcher and
the Superscritcher, forthcoming, The Annals of the
History of Computing ,NARA RG457, SRH-361,
“History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two,
The General Cryptanalytic Problems,” 269-270.

74.54/38 MAC Outline 30, MAC Outlines 103,
SATYR. 48 NSA AHA ACC 26373, Chief, “F’

FOP-SEGREFHIGCOMINTHREL -FO-UGA-AUG GaN -GB RAND Need —

Branch, “RAM Equipment,” 29 March 1945. The first
model of Satyr was built at Dayton in late 1944. Four
additional models were made bythe navy and the
SIS group built its own version. All of them were quite
direct analogs of the popular Hagelin machine. They
even incorporated wheels from anactual Hagelin.
Relays and plugboards eased the task of setting the
machine.

75. (. NSA CCH, G.O. Hayward “Operation
Tunny: Deciphering German Teleprinter Traffic in
WWII _ at Bletchley Park,” 14 July 1989,
Z/1396GW/9000/5, 9.

76. €PS778T7 NSA CCH Series XII Z,CNO, CIT
Paper TS47, “Report on British Attack on FISH,”
Washington, May 1945. &&) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Fish’Dragon Notes,” February 1945. @S4488 NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Fish Notes,” 17 January 1945.
(P8/7/SB NSA CCH Series XII Z, “M.A.C. Outlines #21,
Tunny Dragon.”

77. (PS7781) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“M.A.C.
Outlines #21, Tunny Dragon.”

78. (F848) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.13,
“The History of OP-20-GYP-1, 1939-1945.” The very
serious and frightening blackouts caused by changes
to Japanese systems, especially the trauma of fall 1944,
are well described in GS44S4) NSA CCH Series
IV.W.1.25.12, “General History of OP-20-3-GYP,”
new Chapter Il, espec. 24.

79. (F8/4SR NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12,
“History of OP-20-3-GYP,” new Chapter HI, 2.

80. 4S//8T, NSA L-5660 CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP,” Appendix 1, 5.

81. (£84455 Most ofthe following discussion
refers only to the group that was based in Washington
and which had a designation of GYP-1. F845 NSA
CCH Series IV.W.1.6.8, 5163287, “The History of
GYP-1.” The cryptanalytic or “Y” section of OP-20-G
subdivided several times and its bureaucratic history is
quite complex.

82. G85) NSA L-5660 CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12,
General History of OP-20-3-GYP, Appendix 1, 7.

83. @S-4H) NSA CCH Series XH Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” Ely memo-
randum 3 October 1942 and attached memoranda
dating to 1 November 1943.

Page 159
~“FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBRANE-NZLIKE

84. (F&+/SH) NSA CCH Series XI Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” 1 November
1943, “Further Remarks onthe Proposed Clinical
Attack.” The quotations are from ibid., L.W. Parke,
“Clinical Attack on Unknown Cipher System...”
23 October, 1943.

85. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, U.S. N.
(Ret.} etal., And IWas There: Pearl Harbor and
Midway-Breaking the Secrets (New York: William
Morrow and Company, Inc., 1985), 409.

86. (U) There are some unconfirmed rumors that
success was partially due tothe theft ofa codebook
from a Japanese ship docked in San Francisco.

87. (F554) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12.,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP,” new chpt. V, 6.

88. €F5465 Such problems may have led tothe
search for machines that would perform Slide Run
type dictionary checks.

89. €FSA4SI) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12.,
“Genera! History of OP-20-3-GYP,” new chpt. V,6.
“the significant reasons for this” [the JN39 error]
“were three (experience with similar processes in
JN 25 show that generalizations are feasible):....”

90. GS-85 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General
History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

91. S448) “G” obtained abadly damaged copy
ofthe machine in December 1944. NSA AHA ACC
17480 “Final Report, Project Pi23, Original J.N.157
Machine,” February 1945, OP-20-G-4-D-3E.

92.48} NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne
“Use of Hypo onthe JN-157,” 21 February 1944,
gives aninsight into how the general-purpose RAMs
were employed toattack Jade. The Hypo was used to
set the starting positions of Jade’s three moving step-
ping switches. Jade had three moving stepping switch-
es, two immobile ones, and astecker. CES/45)
NSA CCH Local Archive, “Army-Navy Descriptive
Dictionary of Cryptologic Terms,” Army Security
Agency, February, 1947. Amachine, Jasmine, whose
details seem to have been lost, was built totest cribs
against Jade. A very primitive electrical and stepping
switch device, Mortor, was quickly constructed to
allow hand testing of cribs tosee ifcrib-plain pairs
completed a circuit.

93. (F844) The first Viper was proposed as
soon as it was thought that Jade might be conquered.

Page 160

While it was being built, a handy but clumsy “bombe”
for Jade was built, the Mortor. It was a cluster of step-
ping switches and wires to handtest menus to solve
Jade settings. It would be replaced bythe Rattler, a
machine described below. 4) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Viper, Plans for Construction of, Steinhardt, L. R.,”
7 Sept. 1943.

04. (F54/8H NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General
History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

95. GS451 NSA CCH Series IV W.1.5.12,
“General History of Op-20-3-GYP.”

96. (PSS) NSA CCH Series IV. W.1.5.12,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

97. €F8-465 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History
of (NAT) JNA2o0 CORAL,” Vol. I], and NSA CCH
IV.W.1.5.12, “General History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

98. (FS+*S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General
History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

99. £75445 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History of
JNA2o Coral (NAT) Volume IIIT.” 74.

100, CFS) NSA CCH Series XH Z, “File Kept
by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” memo-
randum on“Personnel in GM-2,” November 1943
indicates that some significant NAT busts were also
discovered by new or inexperienced personnel. Busts
were also important to the entry into JN157.

101. €FSA4‘SH NSA CCH Series IXW 1.5.12,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

102. (ES) $338 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
L.R. Steinhardt, OP-20-G-4a-5, “Aproposed form
of Gypsy...” 13 Dec. 1944. NSA CCH XII Z, “Project
M-312, Gypsy,” 28 February 1945, NCA, Washington,
DC.

103. TS} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Viper, Plans
for Construction of, Steinhardt, L. R.,” 7 Sept. 1943.

104. G@SUSD NSA AHA ACC 17480 “Final
Report, Project Pi23, Original J.N.1§7 Machine,”
28 February 1945, OP-20-G-4-D-3, 5.

105. @S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Proposal for a
Tape Reader on Gypsy,” 2 April 1945.

106. (FSA/SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,CBO CIT
Paper TS-31, “TOPAZ,” Washington, December, 1945.
(FE4S5) Onthe history of JNi1i, NSA CCH
Series [V W.1.5.12, “General History of OP-20-3-GYP,”
new Chapter IIf, 20.

TOR. SECRETICOMINTIREL-TO-UGA- AUG CAN-OBR-ANE-NZEIAE
-FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTIREL TOUSA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZEIAT-

107. T3 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of
RAM Equipment, 1945. The first TOPAZ seems to
have been completed in March 1945. TPS) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,CBO CIT Paper TS-31, “TOPAZ,”
Washington, December, 1945, 2. A smaller but similar
machine, ASP, had an even shorter life in 1944, when
the Japanese changed their callsign systems.

108. #} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic
Phases of Mamba,” GM-2 6 April 1944. €) NSA
AHA ACC 26373, “Inventory of RAM Equipment,”
January 1945.

109. €F84/St) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Mamba.”
($5446 NSA CCH Series XH Z, “Communications
Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report II,”
21 December 1948. ($+ NSA CCH Series XII Z,
RAM list and Conference at Dayton, 11 April 1945.
(} NSA/CCH Series XII Z, “Cryptanalytic Phases of
Mamba,” GM-2 6 April 1944.

110. GES4/88 NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP,” Appendix 1, 7.

11. FFPRYSD NSA AHA ACC 543 “MAC.
Outlines #4, Slide Run Machine.”

112. (U) NSA, Lambros D. Callimahos and William
F. Friedman, Military Cryptanalysis, Part I, NSA,
1959, 230-238.

113. GSA45—5 NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.13,
“The History of OP-20-GYP-1, 1939-1945,” 1,
points out that the sum ofthe digits had to equal
three. Divisibility meant without carry.

114. (FS7/SB-OP-20-G did make some other early
contributions. A theft of books had allowed it into the
Japanese merchant ship systems from 1929 through
the summer of 1941. With the experience gained from
that, reentry into such systems began again during
1942. Throughout the war, the information from such
systems, including those handled by SIS, proved of
great significance to America’s submarine fleet in the
Pacific. See GS-48 NSA CCH IV.W.1.5.12, “General
History of OP-20-3-GYP,” new chpt. V, 4-5.

115. (U) Rear Admiral Edwin T. Layton, U.S. N.
(Ret.) etal., And [Was There: Pearl Harbor and
Midway; Breaking the Secrets (New York: William
Morrow and Company, Inc.), 1985, 409.

116. C2S+464) NSA CCH Series IV.W.1.5.12,
“General History of OP-20-3-GYP.”

—FOP-GEGRETHGCMINTHREE-TC-USA-AUS-CAN-OBR-AND NZEI—

117. @Y NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R Steinhardt,
“Additive Machines: Historical Summary of,”
27 November 1944.

118. CF) [4233] 14222].

119. 8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
“Full-Selector,” 31 October 1942.

120. (9 NSA CCH Series XII Z,OP-20-GM
J.A. Skinner, “Proposal for aDecoding Device,”
16 February 1942.

121. 9) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “SSA
Proposal for 70mm Film I.C. Machine,” 8 June 1945
(F8445B NSA CCH Series XII Z,OP-20-G “Analysis
of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24 March
1945. E8445) NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley,
“Preparation of Weighting Film, Secondary Stage
Problem,” Op-20-G, 2 August 1945. OP-20-G and the
SIS would return to Eastman later in the war with pro-
posals for sophisticated film-based machines. Two
were turned into hardware by Eastman, the Amber
and the 5202, before orclose tothe end ofthe war.
They are discussed in the next chapter.

122. (S}-NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
“Additive Machines: Historical Summary of,”
27 November 1944. £8} NSA AHA 1505, John N.
Seaman, “Memorandum for Major Edgerton, Liaison
with Navy #3, Use of Ramon Jap Naval Problems of
BI Type,” 9June 1944. Note that the Gray-NCR
Comparator was also used onthe JN25 problem.
However, it performed the required tests very slowly.
46} NSA CCH Series XIE, Hagelin, Box 2, Folder,
“Comparators.”

123. (} Steinhardt, L. H., “Copperhead II (Project
M-230) Final Report,” 9 November 1944. This a
fascinating description of the proposed design. It was
tohave along film tape with the text and additives
run against each other. As they did so, the subtraction
process would yield a“mask.” The known groups
would be on another long film. Asits contents were
projected against the mask, photocells would register
how much light passed through. They would trigger
electronic counters which, once reaching a threshold
value, would indicate the position of hits.

124. £8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
“Additive Machines: Historical Summary of,”
27 November 1944, indicates that the NCR-built
special desktop electromechanical machine was

Page 161
FOP-GEGREHICOMINFHREL TO-USA-AUS-CAN OBR AND NZETC

aresult ofthe ‘additive’ problem design effort.
Some sixty ofthose Mark [Vor “fruit” or “Big Adam”
machines were constructed. T$} NSA CCH Series XII
Z, OP-20-G, “Additive Theory, Folder IV, Miscellaneous,
Part A,” 1942-43, gives details ona hand-held system
using IBM cards (6,000 toa set) as stencils to visually
identify divisible by three code-additive combinations. It
also contains “G’s” ideas for other types of additive
machinery.

125. 48 NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-GH-F,
13 November 1943, Steinhardt, L.R. “JN-25 Double
Pentagraph High Speed Machine for Locating.” *S.NSA
CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “Additive Theory, Folder
IV, Miscellaneous, Part A,” 1942-43, points out that
Japanese errors frequently played a role in allowing “G”
torecover enough additives tobegin analysis. But it
argues that with high-speed machinery, analysts would
no longer have to depend upon them.

126. G&S) OP-20-G-4-A5, 23 November 1944, L.R.
Steinhardt, “Possible Engineering Solutions for
Full Selector Problems.” GS44SH NSA CCH Series
IV.W.1.5.12. “General History of OP-20-3-GYP,”
New Chpt. II, 18, 23. The JNII and JN25 crises also
led toproposals for “quick-fix” mechanical devices,
See €F5) NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R. Steinhardt,
“JN-11 (George Molecular Attack) Machine Aid For,”
27 July 1945.

Page 162 —FOR-GEGRETICOMINFHREL-T6-UGA AU EGAN -GBR-AND NZL
TOP SECRE TICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS_CAN-GBR-ANB-NZEDE-

Chapter 6

(U) B

eyond the Bombes and Beyond World War IT

 

 

 

(U) Some of the cryptanalytic emergencies the
British and Americans confronted pushed them
to create machines that were close to being com-
puters; atleast the machines contained hints of
the great potentials of electronic calculation. But
despite the wish of many ofthe young army and
navy electrical engineers to “show their stuff’ and
create the most advanced machines possible, the
pace of innovation was determined by cryptana-
lytic needs rather than by electronic visions. “G”
and “F” were arms of operational agencies, not
research organizations. The two groups built
some of the most complex electronic computing
machines inthe world during the war, but their
duty was tosolve problems rather than invent
perfect automata. That led them away from seri-
ous consideration of either a universal program-
mable machine or a binary-based computer.

(U) Perhaps that was a wise decision. Those in
America who had committed to an attempt to
create universal machines saw their projects yield
quickly outdated technological patchworks. For
example, Vannevar Bush’s Rockefeller Analyser
was a conglomeration of electronic, electrical, and
mechanical components that was put to rest soon
after the war ended. The Harvard-IBM project
under Howard Aiken depended upon the crafts-
man’s art of combining IBM card-reading equip-
ment, relays, pulleys, and shafts. Even the
wartime project atthe University of
Pennsylvania, which began with a commitment to
the use of electronics, ended with a batch of spe-
cial-purpose calculation boxes linked by huge
cables rather than bya software program. None
ofthe grand attempts created the ultra-high-
speed and full universal machines that had been
hoped for.

(U) Although OP-20-G and the SIS did not
aim for the great prize ofa single computer for

—FEP-GEGRETHGOMINTHREL -TO-USAAUS-CAN-GBRUAND-NZEEHE—

every function, they achieved a great deal. By the
time Japan surrendered, the Americans were
building electronic machines using twice as many
tubes asthe British Colossus. The advances in
electronics atthe cryptanalytic centers were
amazing. But inseveral ways the Americans’
achievements were limited. The cryptanalytic
problems they solved with digital electronics were
not memory dependent, and some ofthe new
electronic machines they built were based on very
clever ways to make analog technology imitate
digital methods. And the new machines were not
true data processors. Although the navy had its
Copperheads and Comparators, large files
remained inthe domain ofthe tabulators and
sorters.

(U) After the Bombe

(U) In late 1943, just as the first OP-20-G and
SIS Bombes were being completed, another stage
inthe development ofcryptanalytic machines
began. Both American engineering groups
returned to a consideration of digital electronics.
At the same time, they began to pay attention to
the Japanese problems.

(U) The war inthe Pacific was an American
show, and the cryptanalytic work was not clut-
tered with the kind of difficulties that complicat-
ed the European relationships. OP-20-G and SIS
had much more freedom, and the British were
more cooperative. Despite the greater independ-
ence, the Pacific never received as much attention
from OP-20-G’s and SIS’s machine builders as
did the Atlantic. There was no crash program to
develop expensive devices toconquer the
Japanese code and cipher systems. However, the
engineers in Washington and Dayton put a great
deal of work into solving problems for the crypt-
analysts assigned to the Asian traffic.

Page 163
FOP-GECRETHCOMINTHREL -TOUSK: AUS, CAN GBR AND NZLIXT

(U) Most of the work on special machines for
the war against Japan was done in OP-20-G. And
much ofthat was directed by one of Vannevar
Bush's ex-students, Lawrence Steinhardt. He had
been left in Washington during 1942 and 1943 to
design what became the Copperhead tape scan-
ning systems and to start building very advanced
analogs of several different Japanese encryption
machines. He was also charged with the responsi-
bility for the machines for all major Japanese
code systems.

(U) Every Which Way: The Code Challenge
Continues

(U) The Japanese additive code problems
challenged OP-20-G’s capabilities throughout the
war. But there were moments of urgency that led
to bursts of activity with the army's and navy’s
engineering groups. In mid-1944, when there
were signs that Japan might begin yet another
series ofalterations that might close its most
important systems to the Allies, “G” intensified its
search for methods and machines. Lawrence
Steinhardt was again detailed to seek out techno-
logical solutions. What he recommended _ indi-
cates how deeply code solutions had become
dependent on massive data processing.

¢FS7/6b-The cryptanalysts had no easy ways
to solve code and additive systems. Even the most
advanced methods of the time demanded tens of
millions of tests and massive amounts of memo-
ry. Probable additives had tobe stripped, the
results run against alarge dictionary, and a judg-
ment made as to whether atrue code group had
been recovered. Then meaning had to be attached
to the clear code. There were no great mathemat-
ical shortcuts for codebreakers. Even the most
efficient methods called for exceptional amounts
of labor, or powerful machines, ones that did not
exist in 1944.

-~ES}/SB- If “G” wanted a machine that could

go beyond the army’s tabulator-relay Slide Run, it
would have to ask its engineers to stretch the lim-

Page 164

its of computing technology. Mass memory was
the key. Lawrence Steinhardt realized that. After
consulting with the OP-20-G cryptanalysts about
what new methods they wished to implement, he
returned to his superiors with an estimate of the
probable cost for a code machine. It was high. But
hewas told that his proposed expenditure of
$500,000 would be acceptable. That was one-
half of what Madame X had cost and the price of
eleven Bombes. But a solution to problems such
as JN25 was worth many millions of dollars.

<F6/45B Steinhardt began a survey of techni-
cal possibilities for a machine that would allow
“G” to employ its various new and more powerful
versions of the additive stripping/high frequency
tests or, if desired, the Jeeping method. This time
he did not even bother to determine iffilm or
even punch tape systems were “memory” possi-
bilities. The sour experience with the earlier
Copperheads and the delays inthe Eastman
Kodak film-based code device effort led him to
explore other alternatives for the critical high-
speed mass memory called for bythe cryp-
tomethods.

CE84/Sh- Steinhardt evaluated all the tech-
nologies used byaspiring computer builders,
including some that would become integral parts
of the first modern computers. He did not discov-
erany ready-made solutions tothe high-speed
memory problem, however. Nor could he find an
easy solution to the challenge of constructing the
switching system needed to select memory ele-
ments. His frustrations grew when “G’s” cryptan-
alysts asked him to focus ona particular problem
and to turn one of their most demanding methods
into hardware. They asked him to design and con-
struct a machine to attack JN25 and to do it with-
in a few weeks.

fe84/8H The machine the cryptanalysts
dreamed about for the JN25 code problems was
anambitious one. What was later called the
“Selector” was toread atleast 100 enciphered
five-digit code groups ata time, rapidly subtract

TORSECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSA AUS CAN, GBRANDNZLUXI
FOP-SEGRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUS-CAN--GBR AND NZI

either additives or another set of codes, check for
divisibility, and then perform the critical step:
compare the resulting clear groups with alist of
scientifically weighted code groups* (100,000 of
them) and calculate whether or not a statistical
threshold had been reached.* Ifthe combined
“weight” scores for the matched groups summed
to or exceeded a specified level, then the device
would signal that true additives might have been
found.

€PS77St) Acritical part ofthe required
machine was a method of quickly changing the
scores associated with the “dictionary” of code
groups. The cryptanalysts wanted to modify the
scores as they learned more about the system or
when they desired to switch the machine from a
weighted frequency to a Jeeping mode.

€S}) With those requirements in mind,
Steinhardt called upon his past experience at
MIT, talked with his contacts on World War II
computer projects, such asthe one at Harvard,
and reviewed what he had learned on earlier OP-
20-G assignments.

CS One of the first options he explored was
for what seemed a wild scheme for a fast memo-
ry. Although ithad first been proposed as an
alternative tothe commutators used onthe
Bombes, the option was soon recognized as a sig-
nificant “memory” possibility. It was a primitive
version of what later came to be called the elec-
trostatic storage tube, a television-like device that
used acharged spot tohold a “bit” ofinforma-
tion.?

(S) To follow up on the idea, in 1944 “M” had
begun exploring the possibilities ofa modified
oscilloscope. Its beam would be electronically
deflected to any one of several hundred spots on
its face; then small metal patches pasted on the
face of its screen could sense which “bits” were
active.*

FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTIREL-FOUSA_AUSCAN- GBR AND NZDIXT

(S} By November Steinhardt decided that he
had learned enough about the “scope” and other
technological possibilities and that he had to
begin construction ofa machine. Hedrew upa
list of recommendations. He reported on six pos-
sibilities for a machine for JN25 and its relatives,
ranking them interms ofthe probability they
could be finished intime to meet the Japanese
code emergencies.

(U) The Navy’s Madame X — the Strangest
Selector

-~S$} Although Steinhardt’s report mentioned
some very advanced alternatives, such as the
oscilloscope memory, it argued for the use of con-
servative technologies and architectures. They
could “get the job done” and quickly so. As far as
the cryptanalytic requirements would allow,
Steinhardt wanted to use sure-fire parts and ana-
log circuitry, but in a unique combination.

~3 Steinhardt proposed a “telephone

exchange” version of a new type of “Selector.” The
first of Steinhardt’s recommendations was for the
use of a technology the SIS had used in some of its
machines, including Madame X, the new crossbar
relays. With them, Steinhardt’s proposed Selector
had the potential to become one of the most pow-
erful machines “G” or any other computer organ-
ization ever built.

€$} Steinhardt knew about the telephone com-
pany’s advanced relays before he went to OP-20-
G. The late 1930s Differential Analyser project at
MIT had used some of the “crossbar” systems the
Bell engineers had developed for their switching
centers. All the young MIT engineers had learned
of impressive logical powers of the “bars.”

€S) The crossbars were miniature switching
stations. A crossbar may be thought of as a square
array of ten horizontal and ten vertical input posi-
tions. The appropriate output is selected atthe
intersection ofthe input positions. If crossbars
were hooked together, they became powerful

Page 165
~FOP-GEGRETICOMINFREL—TO-USA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-ANDNZL/X4

selectors of electrical pathways. When two cross-
bars were connected intandem, they could trig-
ger the selection of one out of 10,000 switching
paths and do it very rapidly.

S) Steinhardt applied his knowledge of cross-
bars tothe code-to-dictionary phase of additive
testing. He realized that with the addition of ten
small relays to a tandem setup of two crossbars, a
five-digit code could betranslated, almost
instantly, to the electrical “address” of any one of
100,000 locations. Ifthe locations contained
code groups’ “weights,” he reasoned, a rapid test
for high-frequency groups might be performed.

“tS His creativity led him much further, to the
outline of a unique memory search methodology.
He thought of a way to do what was, for the time,
massively parallel “look-ups.” He proposed that
100 of the crossbar-relay combinations be linked
together. That would allow 100 code groups to
simultaneously link to their frequency “weights.”
It was a brilliant concept. His new Selector would
bea parallel processor.

(83) The crossbar provided the basis for a very
reliable and fast digital memory Selector. But
Steinhardt also had to find a practical way to
match calculation speed tothe rapid memory
search. After examining electronic digital meth-
ods of summing weights and performing thresh-
old tests for the detection of statistically “good”
code groups, he concluded that the most efficient
approach was to return to the use of analog meth-
ods and equipment.

(U) A Wall of Knobs

tS) The cryptanalytical method for the addi-
tive code systems dictated a digital switching sys-
tem tofind locations of values, but it did not
require a digital memory. Taking hold ofthat
opportunity to simplify his machine, Steinhardt
turned to an extension of previous ideas for build-
ing high-speed memories. Electrical components
had been suggested as means of holding constant

Page 166

values in digital form for input for calculations in
various early precomputers. The army’s Freak
had tried togo beyond that, employing a two-
state version based oncondensers toact asa
dynamic digital memory. That had been an ambi-
tious and none-too-happy exercise, however.

($F When Steinhardt estimated the number of
components that would be required bya digital
memory for the weights for 100,000 code groups,
he correctly decided to retreat to an analog mem-
ory. Ifhe had chosen an approach like that in
Freak to store values as on-off representations of
numbers, the components for the code Selector’s
memory would total tothe millions. To avoid
that, he proposed analternative that. reduced
engineering demands. But even his clever alter-
native called for a heroic and complex machine.

8) The Selector “memory” was to be a set of
100,000 variable resistors, each with an external
knob which was to be used to set the electrical
“weight” for acode group. Using resistors
reduced the number of components; only one
resistor would be needed for each memory loca-
tion. But even with one component per memory
location, the memory would be an engineering
challenge. The banks ofresistors and knobs
would have to stretch across a large room, reach-
ing up to its ceiling.

+S) Steinhardt’s proposed resistor memory
would be fast. But, given the amount of available
time and manpower, Steinhardt did not plan to
make it satisfy one of the cryptanalysts’ important
specifications. It was not tobe made fully auto-
matic. It would require a great deal of man-and-
woman-power to set the “weights.” Whenever a
problem changed orwhen the cryptanalysts
revised their list of weights, the memory would
have tobe “programmed” by resetting the
100,000 dials.

S$} When Steinhardt first described the pro-
posed machine option and the need to set the
memory’s values by hand, his superiors hesitated.

FOR-GEGRETICOMMFTHREL-TFOUGA -AUE-GAN,-GBR-AND-NZE-
~FOR-SEGRETICOMINFHRELTO-USA-AUG-GAN-CBROANE-NZE—

Steinhardt admitted that it would take a crew of
twenty WAVES a full duty watch to reset all the
resistors. But, he argued, given the comparative
speed and ease of construction ofa resistor mem-
ory, the eight- to ten-hour wait before a new prob-
lem could be attacked was reasonable. Given the
operating speed ofthe new Selector, aten-hour
setup time still left his machine with a major

advantage over any other method of additive

attack.®

(S} Steinhardt’s crossbar-resistor design
included another way of avoiding the size and
complexity of digital electronics. The “arithmetic”
of the machine’s “frequency check” was to be ana-
log, like the IC plate machine. One hundred val-
ues would be sent in parallel to a circuit that test-
ed electrical values for “enough,” not how many.

CESH45 The simplicity ofthe analog arith-
metic circuits helped make the proposed crossbar
machine quite fast and made its construction
seem feasible. Ifthe machine was set to test for
only the weights and not strip the additives,
Steinhardt explained, 18,000 ofthe 100-group
tests could be performed inan hour. That was
quite anadvance over the army’s Slide Run
machine and the navy’s NC4. And, Steinhardt
argued, the machine could be in operation within
less than ayear because it was based on known
technologies. ° But he also wanted “G” to consider
other options.

(CT) Walls of Tubes

SyAn inherently more attractive alternative,
especially toa young electrical engineer, was to
rely upon electronics. Electronic tubes, whether
gas-filled or vacuum, were orders faster than any
other digital technology ofthe time. Although
Steinhardt believed that standard tubes could not
beused for the Selector’s memory, he thought
they might bea possibility for the switching
(selection) process. Therefore, his second design
option for aJN code machine had electronic

“TOP SECRETHCOMIN THREE TO USA AUS-CAN-GBRAND-NZEHKA-

switching, but retained the huge resistor “electri-
cal” memory.

48 Aspart ofthe JN25 project, Howard
Engstrom had asked other “M” engineers to help
Steinhardt by making another thorough investi-
gation ofthe possibilities of electronic circuits.
With an eye onthe potential for finally creating
anelectronic Bombe, aswell as building
machines for the “weighting” attack, new tube
technologies and circuit designs were examined.

8 What they reported was not good. The first
depressing news was about the possibility of
building an electronic wheel. The report onan
electronic matrix which could act as a substitute
for the Bombe commutators contained a bleak
conclusion. With the two most reliable digital cir-
cuit designs and standard hardware, a twenty-six
by twenty-six matrix demanded over 1,000 tubes.
The engineers also reported little hope for multi-
function tubes. The many projects on radically
new designs had not led to vast improvements.
The available special tubes and circuits, such as
the strobotron and Duenna circuits, still called for
over 500 tubes per matrix. Asa_ result, they
reported that anelectronic selection matrix
seemed an improbability.

€S} The number of tubes and the likely main-
tenance problems seemed so great that “M’s” tube
experts again turned away from digital electron-
ics. They thought they had little chance to build
an electronic Bombe before the war was conclud-
ed, and they had similar thoughts about the
chances for an electronic JN25 machine.

“TS) They recommended another analog solu-
tion. They pointed to an esoteric “frequency con-
version” circuit as an alternative to the on-off dig-
ital designs.’

4$}+Lawrence Steinhardt did his own review of
digital possibilities before giving the “frequency
conversion” idea serious consideration. He put
the electronic matrix report together with his past

Page 167
TOP SECRETHCONINTHREL-FO-UGA-AUE-GAN-GER-AND NZX

experience and weighed the advantages of elec-
tronic switching for the JN code problem. He did
not like the results of his review, but he had to
accept them.

“ST His first disappointment was over the
speed of electronics. He found that if he used a
single matrix oftubes instead ofthe set of 100
crossbars for switching and selection of weights,
the electronic machine would be only twice as fast
as the electric design. It would have to cycle so
many times tofind acorrect pathway inthe
memory that its advantage in raw speed would be
vastly reduced. Of course, if the single tube matrix
was replaced with, as in the crossbar design, 100
matrices, the electronics would make the
machine perform not 3,600 tests per hour, but
over 3,000,000.

($ That made anelectronic selector very
attractive. But such an advanced machine would
need more than 100,000 tubes. Steinhardt real-
ized that was too much to ask in the mid-1940s.
Tube failures were too frequent. Based on the
average life ofstandard tubes ofthe time,
Steinhardt calculated that under the best condi-
tions ten tubes would cease functioning every
hour; by the time they were located and replaced,
at least three more would go bad. That made the
full electronic switch design for the proposed
Selector unacceptable.

48 Steinhardt’s concerns about tubes were
based upon more than theoretical calculations.
He had direct experience. He had worked with
digital electronics at MIT and onthe Duenna
project at “G.” ® The Duenna project had led the
navy’s engineers to many insights on how to
extend tube life. But even with the knowledge that
most failures were caused byturning tube
machines onand_ off, Steinhardt believed that
unless very special types of tubes with extra long
life were developed, 3,000 tubes were the limit
for an operational machine. And he quite correct-
ly saw little chance that either long life or suffi-

Page 168

ciently complex multifunction tubes could be
developed in time to fight the Pacific code war.?

(©) Into the Beyond and the Past, Rooms of
Wires and Disks

£8) Asa result ofthe disappointments with
electronics, Steinhardt took another look at older
technologies. His survey made him more than a
bit pessimistic about building any type of
Selector. He had encountered some discouraging
facts about the use ofthe most reliable of tech-
nologies, standard relays. When he had calculat-
ed how many relays would be needed to select
and test the required 100 code groups simultane-
ously, he was overwhelmed. Still envisioning the
machine’s memory asthe collection of 100,000
resistors and their knobs, he concluded that even
more relays than electronic tubes would be need-
ed for the selecting system.

¢S} A “prohibitive” number would be required
and maintenance of such a machine, he reported,
would be as much ofa chore as keeping Madame
X running.

(U) Desperate Options and a Conservative
Selector

-€S} Although Steinhardt would eventually rec-
ommend the use of crossbars and resistors, that
alternative was not really attractive to him. The
thought of 100,000 resistors for the Selector’s
memory was especially troubling. So he asked
other engineers at OP-20-G and NCR to explore
additional possibilities. Some of the recommend-
ed alternatives approached the bizarre.

8) There were last-gasp attempts to reintro-
duce microfilm memory and suggestions for opti-
cally read glass disks.'°

&) There was also a brief revival of the idea of
turning automobile parts into computers. While
the commutators on the Bombes were distant rel-
atives ofdistributors, the idea for the JN25

TOR SECRETJCOMILHIREL—TO-USA-AUS,-CAN,- GBR-AND-NZLIAG
-FOP-GEGRETHEONINTHREL-FE-USAAUS-CAN GBR AND NZDT

machine suggested amuch closer relationship
between computers and automobile electrical
systems. It was possible, some engineers said, to
create a high-speed switching system (500 opera-
tions per second) using ignition distributor tech-
nology.”

£8) That suggestion does not seem to have
been taken too seriously by Steinhardt. But
another one that seemed to be as far-fetched did
capture his attention. Ayoung “G” engineer,
Lieutenant Noble, responded with anidea that
became the seed of one the most advanced and
unusual research projects “G” undertook during
the war.

«$} Noble’s idea centered upon the new and
relatively untried technology of digital magnetic
recording. OP-20-G had magnetic wire recorders
that were used to copy the most important analog
intercepts. Noble believed he could coax them
into becoming the basis for a mass digital memo-

ry.

«§) Hethought his proposed magnetic wire
scanning devices could overcome the problems
encountered with other moving media such as
microfilm. To provide information at rates
matching electronics, they all required such high
transport speeds that they could not be precisely
sensed. Despite all sorts of experiments, film,
disk, and tape transport systems remained rela-
tively slow and problematic.

3 Noble, however, thought that he had
found asolution, atleast for wire recording. He
thought he could line up one hundred of his rela-
tively small wire recording devices in such away
that sensing difficulties would be avoided. In his
plan, two ofthe differenced code digits would
cause the switching system to select the correct
recorder; then asensor would select the correct
weight asthe recorder cycled through its 1,000
values. Because each magnetic recorder held a
few densely packed entries, processing would be
very speedy. Resetting weights would be painless

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTTREL FOS A aS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZE—

because the magnetic wires, Noble stated, could
be interchanged. *

48) Fortunately, Steinhardt was not forced to
immediately choose among the many technologi-
cal alternatives for the Selector. The JN25 prob-
lem had eased somewhat. In addition, the mathe-
maticians at “M” found it impossible to agree on
which of their complex weighting schemes should
be employed. As a result, operational cryptanalyt-
ic attention shifted to other high-level Japanese
naval systems. That allowed Steinhardt’s team to
avoid making any hasty technological decisions.

-~FS455 However, they and the cryptanalysts
decided to begin to build a experimental version
of a new Selector. It was to be a limited four-digit
version, almost a bread-board model. The four-
digit version vastly reduced the potential power
and speed of the device and made it unsuitable
for aJN25 attack. But it reduced the number of
required components. That made the use of the
inexpensive and reliable simple relays practical.”

“35 The search for a high-speed Selector was
not ended, however. JN25 and the intellectual
challenge of the Selector problem had captured
the attention ofmany at OP-20-G, including
Howard Engstrom. He gave the green light to two
very adventurous projects. Both tried to push
existing technologies far beyond their limits in an
attempt to find the high-speed memory and cir-
cuitry that an operational Full (five-digit) Selector
would need.”*

(UC) Walls of Pipes and Thousands of Dots

(U) The development of radar during World
War IT had led toa very unusual memory device,
the acoustic or “sonic” delay line. The delay line’s
job was to hold and recycle signals so that a radar
operator’s display screen could have refreshed
and stable images. The “lines” were tubes filled
with chemicals. Ateach end ofthe tube was a
transducer. Anincoming electrical signal was
transformed into a pulse within the tube. The

Page 169
FOR-GEGRETHCOMIFFIREL-TO-USA AUS, CAN CBR AND NZEDINT

transducer atthe end ofthe tube changed the
pulse back into an electrical signal. The chemical
medium within the tube, typically mercury, circu-
lated while holding the data pulses.

(U) Unfortunately, delay lines could hold only
moderate amounts of data; they were very tem-
peramental about the amount of heat they were
exposed to; and much about their behavior
remained a mystery. But they presented data at
rates several orders faster than other media of the
era.’5

€&- Howard Engstrom, still insearch ofa
capable machine for the Japanese codes, had
decided to take some great chances. With Enigma
and the Fish machines under control, he deter-
mined it was safe to assign some of his most valu-
able men to work on a delay-line Selector.

(®) One ofthe rooms at“G’s” Nebraska
Avenue center soon had avery strange appear-
ance. Abox full of electronics stood in front ofa
wall of metal tubes. The young naval engineers
spent weeks trying togather the electronic
switching system, the chemical delay lines, and
the prototype calculating units into a functioning
machine.

S$) While the group in Washington was on its
adventure, something more technically coura-
geous was taking place within the secret rooms of
the NCML in Dayton. Two of “M’s” brightest engi-
neers had been allowed to work ona very special
version of the Selector when they were not busy
with emergencies. Ralph Palmer, the engineer
from IBM who later played a critical role in its
computer history, led a team that was attempting
to build a magnetic memory and advanced photo-
optical Selector.”®

(S} The Palmer-Reid Selector seems a very
strange contraption today, but in the mid-1940s
their prototype was seen by visitors to Dayton as
an exciting alternative, partially because it was
another attempt to develop and apply electrostat-

Page 170

icmemory. Their Oscillograph Full Selector had
the potential to become one of the most powerful
and fastest of all the RAM machines.

¢&) Their Selector was to consist of 100 mag-
netic disks (atechnology yet tobe born), elec-
tronic circuitry, a heat-sensitive printing system,
and ten very special oscilloscopes. The disks were
to be divided into two sets of fifty each, one set for
possible additives and the other for message text.
One hundred groups would be on each message
disk. The two sets of disks were to spin in syn-
chrony, then be offset to accomplish a full overlap
test. Advanced electronic circuitry would differ-
ence the two data streams and then select one of
the ten oscilloscopes. Those ten “memories” were
to hold the 100,000 code weight entries.*”

-€8yThe electronic circuits of “Palmer’s special
project” would, through acoordinate system,
select one of the 10,000 spots on the face of the
proper oscilloscope, then turn processing over to
an analog system.

8} The electrostatic storage was tobe very
smart. Each of the screen’s dots was to have one
of anumber of possible densities representing the
assigned weight for each code group. To register a
score, the oscilloscope was then tobe imaged
onto a photographic mask. The amount of light
passing through the mask would be proportional
tothe code’s weight. A photocell system would
sense the amount of light and then throw a par-
ticular amount of current toa condenser. When
all the groups in an overlap had been tested, the
amount of charge onthe condenser would serve
as a measure of the probability that correct addi-
tives had been located.

S$} Another subsystem in Palmer’s Selector
was to be used to dump a charge onto a “master”
condenser and, atthe same time, 200 others.
Each of those 200 was a “memory” for the good-
ness ofeach ofthe possible overlap tests. The
amount ofthe charge on each of the condensers
would determine how long its particular associat-

“FOP-GEGRETHICOMINTHREL-TFO-UGA-AUE,-GAN-CBR-AND NEL
FOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZUIXT-

ed printing head would rest onthe teledotos
paper inthe Selector’s printer. The greater the
charge, the longer the print line.

$7 Palmer did not complete his machine
before he returned toIBM tolead many ofits
computer projects, including its magnetic “tape
processing” developments. But his Selector proj-
ect was not wasted. His experiments with mag-
netic disks provided a basis for the navy’s pivotal
magnetic recording development projects after
the war.

(U) The Relay Selector Gets an Electronic
Face Lift

+8) While the delay line and oscilloscope
designs were being drafted, the final design and
construction phases of the safe-and-sure simple
relay Selector continued. But asthe machine’s
design progressed, the commitment toa pure
relay technology or to relay switching with a resis-
tor memory dissolved. The engineers wanted to
experiment, and they were allowed to do so as the
Pacific war was ending. The Selector became a
conglomeration ofold and new technologies.
Within a few years after the war, it had grown to
be, like Madame X, a room full of relay banks and
plugboards, but it had a special addition, digital
electronic components.

££ The shift to the use of some digital elec-
tronics came asa result of an increased trust in
the technology and a realization that a pure relay
machine would be too slow. But the Mercury Full
Selector of June 1945 was neither a showpiece
electronic device nor anexample of advanced
engineering imagination. Mercury did move away
from analog calculation, but it was relatively slow,
and itcontinued inthe OP-20-G tradition of
using the least resistant technological combina-
tions. However, it was hoped that the machine
and the cryptanalytic method it embodied would
justify building a fully electronic version. ‘®

TOR-SECRETICOMINT Rib TOUS AA SCAN GENE Nee

(TS44S1) When Mercury first appeared, it was
aquite impressive seven-foot high by fourteen-
foot-long bank of relays that was served by two
cabinets of electronics. Itgrew even larger.
Within afew years itapproached the size of
Madame X. Its expansion was due to postwar
operational cryptanalytic needs and the contin-
ued reluctance tobuild anelectronic code
Selector. The number of Mercury’s relay banks
was increased tenfold in order to turn it back into
a five-digit machine and to expand its dictionary
of stored code weights tothe required 100,000
values.

CES#48H The front end ofthe mid-1945
Selector was quite conventional. An IBM collating
machine with its two card readers was the input
device. Code and possible additive were read in
simultaneously, one value on each card plus an
identification sequence. The readers were not
exceptionally fast. Infact, descriptions ofthe
machine bemoaned the Selector’s slowness
because of the low speed of the collator.

CFS445) The next part of the machine was a
bit more innovative, but it was a mixture ofthe
old and new. The pulses from the card reader
were passed to eighty gas-filled tubes. But they
were connected toa small relay matrix that was,
in turn, connected to familiar plugboard matri-
ces. They were called upon when false addition or
subtraction was needed for additive stripping.

(45/485 The number that emerged from the
plugboard then entered atree-like structure of
some 1,000 relays. That was the “selector” in the
system. The relay system then passed the code
value to a true technology throwback, a bank of
plugboards with 10,000 entry points. The plug-
board banks were Mercury’s “memory.”

(F84459 Each of those points was in turn con-
nected bya plug wire to one of twenty “weight”
relays. Every time the profile of weights changed,
the engineers had to rewire those connections.
Each known code group had a value from zero to

Page 171
 

nineteen associated with it. Despite s:me tricks
that reduced the number of code valu2s that had

to be plugged in.t change ofw ‘ng * as a mas-
sive job that tocx several days o effort. Pe: haps
the difficulty ofthe plugging was one reason why
the 1945 Mercurv was restricted toa memory of
only ten thousand “weights.” But the replugging
was probably less time-consuming overall than
trying to maintain and change acondenser type
of memory.”

CESAASD Some parts of Mercury were techno-
logically upto date. After the weights left the
relays, Mercury began to be something of an elec-
tronic digital processor. Inside one of its cabinets
was alarge electronic ring counter (something
quite like what Bush had used in his Comparator)
that summed the digital values that were “select-
ed” bythe suspected plain codes. Next to that
counter was another one quite like it, but the
“threshold” digital electronic component was
unusual for a “G” machine. With the aid of a plug-
board and a rotary switch, the second ~ing count-

Page 172

er could calculate asimple regression equation
(Y = a+ bx). The resulting value, which changed
as each card was read, served as a benchmark for
a test of significance of the accumulated weights.
The parameters of the equation were usually set
to the average weight value of accumulated mes-
sages.*°

(457754) A third set of electronic tubes, called
the “overlap counter,” counted the number of
weights sent to the accumulator during a run.”

CFS778_— When the electronic evaluation unit
that stood between the accumulator, the overlap
counter, and the regression unit was activated (it
could be set to check the results after every card
was read), Mercury became a “smart” machine.
The machine itself decided what was or was not a
set cf probable additives. Ifthe accumulator-
overlap balance did not match the value in the
comparison unit, noresults would be printed.
The machine might also be ordered to automati-

~FOP-GEGRETIGOMIFFIREL-FO-UGA-AUS-CAN-SBICAND NZEIt
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-FO-UGhUS-C:AN-GB RAND NZL —

cally run a new set of cards that had been stacked
in back of the first deck.**

TT8//SB- The postwar Mercury, although an
ugly kludge, proved useful to the navy for almost
half adecade. It was used for cipher vs cipher
attacks and was even coaxed into becoming a ver-
sion of the old Gee Whizzer. It could be made to
test for the frequency of digraphs and thus give
insights into transposition systems. **

(U) The Biggest Snakes of All — The Navy
Almost Builds an Electronic Bombe

(U) While the “M” group at OP-20-G contin-
ued tosearch for machines to breach the
Japanese code systems in1i944 and 1945, they
and Friedman’s crew had to respond to new chal-
lenges posed by the enciphering machines of the
Axis powers. Germany threw the most curves at
the cryptanalysts in Washington, but the
Japanese also made changes in their systems that
led to a search for new RAM.

(U) The complex analogs ofthe Japanese
cipher machines that “G” constructed during
1943 had proved very helpful, but they were not
analytic machines. They essentially were decryp-
tors, machines to be used after a system had been
solved. The cryptanalysts wanted more: a
machine to attack the systems, especially the
JN157 enciphering device, Jade.

¢49//8P Busts and other operator errors had
led to a general knowledge of the machine, to the
ability to guess daily “wheel” orders and stecker
settings, and, bylate 1943, even tothe discovery
of the wiring of its stepping switches.

(FSA/S4) All that presented a tantalizing
opportunity for analysts such as Frank Raven and
Lieutenant Braun, but also frustration. They still
had to find the starting positions of the important
parts ofthe machine inorder toread the Jade
messages. The task was formidable. In its worst
moments “G” thought it might have to explore as

~TOP-SEGRETIGOMIFAHREL-FC-UGA-AUG,-CAN-GER-AND-NZEH—

many aS 10,000,000 to 30,000,000 possibilities
for each daily “system” even though its attack was
based upon cribbing.**

€F54/8B That demanded too much of the tab-
ulators, even of the NC machines. So Lawrence
Steinhardt was asked to devise a“Grenade” for
the Japanese cipher machines, or at least one for
the stubborn JN157.

(U) He quickly chose a name for the proposed
machine. He ealled it “Rattler.” But ittook some
time before the architecture and hardware of
Rattler were selected. There were many twists
and turns before Rattler became an electronic
version ofa “bombe,” atleast abombe for the
Japanese stepping-switch problems.

CSHB Because of the pressure to deliver a
machine assoon as possible, Steinhardt at first
wanted the NCR group assigned to build Rattler
to use standard technologies. He wrote Joe Desch
in early 1944 recommending that Rattler was to
be “entirely nonoptical and non-electronic in
character.” Although it was to have old-fashioned
components, Steinhardt thought it could perform
the required minimum of 10,000,000 tests with-
in eleven minutes.” Calling on in-hand technolo-
gyhad agreater benefit. By using the electro-
mechanical stepping switches from Viper and
some relays and plugboards, Steinhardt thought a
Rattler that tested ashort crib against cipher
could be in operation within three weeks.

(U) But some disadvantages to using old com-
ponents surfaced and the construction of Rattler
was delayed. The drawback to the first proposal
was that itcalled for the coordination of 108
electromechanical stepping switches. Joe Desch
thought that a bit too much too ask. He also won-
dered ifthe stepping switches could be made to
work as fast as Steinhardt imagined. After review-
ing the first design with Desch, Steinhardt also
had doubts. So he approved delaying the project
while other options were explored.

Page 173
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA-AUS-CAN- OBR AND NZI

(U) After two very tension-filled days,
Steinhardt presented another design. It was even
more committed to old, trustworthy technolo-

26 ‘ ’ . >
gy.” Steinhardt’s second design was also driven
by the need to deliver a machine to the cryptana-
lysts within a few weeks.

(U) He had thought of a handy a'ternative to
the stepping switches. Asa substitute for at least
some ofthem, Steinhardt suggested that Desch
develop what Howard Aiken had used on his
Harvard-IBM protocomputer, avery high-speed
tape version of the IBM card,

(U) Using the uncut IBM paper stock as the
input medium and six slightly modified versions
ofthe readers from IBM sorting machines, it
would be possible, Steinhardt claimed, to elimi-
nate most ofthe stepping switches and perform
the crib tests in perhaps half the time the first
design required. The six input tapes would be
representations ofthe letter developments of the
crib letters.

(U) Joe Desch considered the second propos-
al and quickly responded with a long list of objec-
tions and alternatives. Asa result, the Rattler
became something much more _ technically
advanced than anyone had imagined a few weeks
before. But asa result of Desch’s recommenda-
tions, ittook an additional half year to turn
Rattler into an operational machine.

(U) The Rattler that emerged was very, very
different from Steinhardt’s early conceptions.
Rattler became one ofthe most advanced elec-
tronic machines of the SIGINT war. The necessi-
ty for speed drove Steinhardt and Desch to take
the risk of relying on electronics.

(U) The electronics needed for the JN157
problem was much less demanding than for the
Enigma, however. The critical component of
Japan’s Jade machine was atelephone stepping
switch which had, at most, twenty-six possible
positions. Its electronic analog needed the same

Page 174

number of “positions.” An Enigma wheel was a
much more complex mechanism to imitate. To
mimic itcalled for a matrix of over 670 “posi-
tions” and allied circuits. That meant approxi-
mately 1,000 tubes to imitate an “E” commutator.

(P87738H The limited number of tubes needed
to imitate astepping switch allowed Desch and
Steinhardt tothink that anelectronic Jade
“pombe” was a possibility. With faith in their abil-
ity to build electronic “rings” because of their pre-
vious work onthe counting circuits ofthe
Comparators, they began todesign aminimal
version of an electronic crib tester. Electronics
was used where essential, but some of the oldest
technologies were incorporated when they
proved most efficient.

(F845) The Rattler that appeared in May
1944 was an electronic stepping-switch version of
avery, very fast crib testing bombe. But it was
limited in function, as were the Enigma Bombe’s
Grenades. In addition todemanding aknown
wheel order, Rattler needed tobe told what
“stecker” had been used. It did not have a diago-
nal board test as did the Bombes.

(U) Rattler had at least 1,000 tubes. Its heart
was six banks of electronic stepping switches
(ring counters) which were analogs of the electro-
mechanical versions used by the Japanese. There
was another electronic component, the large cab-
inet of detector circuitry used to identify a hit.

€FS4/61) Ahuge bank oflights allowed the
machine’s operator to see the positions of the var-
ious stepping switches when crib matched cipher
text.2” Rattler had other technological throw-
backs. The electronic switches fed into banks of
relays, and much of the setup of the machine was
done through rows of plugboards. Twenty-five of
them were used for the final “switching” function
of the two “fixed” steppers in Jade.

(U) Rattler was atechnical and operational
success. It was able torun through all the posi-

TOR-SECRETICOMITIREL-TO-USA-AUSGAN-GER-ANB-NZLAG
FOP-SECREHICOMINTAREL-TO-USA-AUS- CAN GAR AHA NEE

 

tions ofthe switches and test for a crib-cipher
match in ten minutes. It proved so valuable that a
second model was built and modifications soon
allowed Rattler tobe used toattack other
Japanese cipher machine systems.

(U) But Rattler did not turn out to be as small
as Lawrence Steinhardt had promised. In fact, it
was a giant; it was seven feet high and nine feet
long.”® However, it was puny when compared to
two other machines Lawrence Steinhardt began
to pursue during late 1944.

(U) The Serpent and Friends

(U) Lawrence Steinhardt had been frustrated
throughout the war by having to continually react
to emergencies. He became tired of hastily build-
ing machines he saw as crypto and engineering
compromises. Like his ex-mentor, Vannevar

“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTTREE-FO-UGA-AUS,-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLINI.

 

 

Bush, he felt that the navy should have a stock of
afew types offast and versatile machines that
were suitable for the full range of cryptanalytic
challenges.

(U) In1944 Steinhardt was able to spend
some time on that concept; by the end of the year
he had a proposal for a machine that would sur-
pass the Comparator’s ability to attack many dif-
ferent types of problems. He called his all-pur-
pose machine “Serpent.”

(U) The Serpent would have been a great sur-
prise and a disappointment to Vannevar Bush: it
turned against his favored technologies and
favored reliability and flexibility over speed.
Worse, it was to be centered on IBM components.
Steinhardt openly declared that photoelectric
technologies were too temperamental and micro-

Page 175
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TOUSA-AUS,--CAN-GBR-AND-NZEH

film too demanding, atleast for a machine that
needed many simultaneous inputs.??

€} Serpent was to have atleast thirty-two
input stations. Each would read the “tapes” made
of uncut IBM tabulator card-stock formed into an
“endless” IBM card. The reading heads were to
each have eighty brushes so that each hole in the
“tape” could be read simultaneously. In each of
the reading stations, as many as 100 of the heads
could be installed. How many were to be active at
one time was to depend upon the cryptanalytic
problem.

($ In addition to the thirty cr more 100-level
reading stations, atleast two more would be
available for multitape operations such as done
on the Comparator. *°

«S) Acontrol system was to allow the tapes to
be driven synchronously, orin any ofthe
Comparator motions (stepping-sliding), or in
such a manner as to imitate a matrix. The varied
stepping would allow Serpent to have many uses.
It could bea Copperhead ora Comparator ora
Bombe or a Rattler or an IC machine ~ or even a
Tessie.

(U) Steinhardt’s Serpent rejected more than
photoelectric reading technology and microfilm.
He did not want to bother with electronic count-
ing, either analog or digital. Because the
machine’s input was relatively slow, the rate of an
IBM sorter, there was little need to bother with
the pesky tubes. Rather, Steinhardt recommend-
ed that aset of relay boxes be constructed. Each
would perform, like the SIS IBM machines, a par-
ticular set of functions.

(U) Steinhardt admitted that Serpent would
not be able to perform some attacks as fast as the
advanced photoelectric RAM, but its chameleon-
like quality would, he claimed, more than com-
pensate. It would, he said, bea perfect type of
machine for research and for the postwar era
when emergencies no longer drove OP-20-G.

Page 176

3) In some cases, he said, it could compete as
an operational machine. While Serpent would
take three or four hours todo a full four-wheel
Enigma run (compared to twenty minutes on the
Bombes), it would, according to Steinhardt’s cal-
culations, be as fast asthe electronic Rattler on
the Jade and Coral problems. As well, he said,
Serpent would be as fast as most ofthe photo-
optical machines, atleast. the ones that used
punch tape or photoplates. When the time need-
ed for photoprocessing was taken into account,
Steinhardt claimed, Serpent would be as efficient
as the microfilm Tessie and Hypo.

S+HSH But competing with those two
machines was not important to Steinhardt; he
and others had concluded something that would
have offended Stanford Hooper: “The crypto-
graphic value of polygraphs and LC. runs .. . is
now admittedly open to question.” ** The signifi-
cance of Serpent would be its ability to quickly
test out such cryptanalytic applications to see if
they were worthwhile. Serpent would prevent
investing incostly special-purpose machines,
ones that had little payoff.

($4455 Steinhardt concluded his report on
the proposed Serpent with some very prophetic
advice: Serpent would be needed for the navy’s
next great challenge, the Russian code and cipher
systems.”

(U) Lawrence Steinhardt’s suggestion for the
IBM Serpent was not followed through, although
he continued to work on it and the design for the
electromechanical counting machine that became
the postwar monster, Alcatraz. Importantly, he
was returning to the fold of the believers in elec-
tronics; he had begun work onan all-electronic
ciphering machine, just as his colleagues were
again forced to try to overcome the weaknesses of
digital electronic components. **

—FOP-GEGRETICGMINTIREL-TO-UEA- RUS -CAN-EBR-AND-NA
FOP-SECRETHOOMINTHREL-FO-US AUS, CAN GBR AND NZ EH —

(U) The Revenge of the Enigma ~ or
Electronics Is Inescapable

(U) Although OP-20-G and the SIS turned to
the Pacific after 1943, the Enigma problem
returned to plague them. Actual and feared
changes tothe Allies’ old nemesis were what
drove the army and navy tocommit massive
resources to solving the problems of large-scale
electronic systems.

45/745 The alterations to the Enigmas and
their operational systems, especially the
Luftwaffe’s decision to make its reflector’s wiring
“pluggable,” demanded so many tests that only
electronics could perform the attack. The “reflec-
tor” problem of 1945 forced the development of
devices that came close tobeing electronic
Bombes.

CLSH/SP At first it appeared that even the best
technology could not overcome the new Enigma
threat. Fortunately, a cryptanalytic attack on the
changeable reflector was created that did not
demand a fully electronic version of the Bombe;
that would have been an impossible goal for the
army, the navy, or the British. But the Duenna,
the Superscritcher, and the Giant machines they
constructed for the problem were “the” electronic
cryptanalytic devices of World War II. They went
far beyond the Comparators or even Rattler.**

€F67/8P But the electronic solution was a
long time coming. The Americans did not leap
from Joe Desch’s electromechanical Bombes and
Madame X to electronic machines. They tried to
conquer “E” operational changes and then the
“reflector” problem with traditional technologies.
OP-20-G made several alterations to the original
Bombe design before it accepted the necessity of
the electronic Duenna, and the SIS built a huge
new relay machine before it started building its
electronic Scritcher.*®

(U) OP-20-G’s changes tothe Bombes were
evolutionary. The first major ones came after the

TOP SECRETICOMINT REL TO USA AUS-CAN-CBR-AND-NZzE—

British made an emergency request for an addi-
tional set of American Bombes, atleast fifty of
them. Joe Desch took the request as an opportu-
nity to improve the standard #530 Bombes. He
produced some two dozen cf the new #1530s in
1944. They used zhe same logic and technology as
the 1943 machines, and they ran atthe same
speed asthe #530s, but were mechanically
stronger and had additional circuitry to eliminate
false stops.°°

€FS+/54) However, even before Desch made
those significant technical improvements in the
original Bombes, he began constructing the “Fire
Engines.” Those eight machines were the same as
the original Bombes except that the vertical order
ofthe commutators was “inverted.” The fast
wheel onthe Enigma became the slow wheel on
the Fire Engine, and the slow wheel onthe
Enigma was inthe fast position inthe Bombe.
Nothing else was significantly different from the
#530s. But the “inversion” was powerful. It
allowed quicker runs when the identity of the fast
wheel was known, and, more importantly, it
allowed what were called “hoppities” runs during
which the operators could stop the machine, then
advance a wheel one step by hand.

CS4485B That cumbersome process was nec-
essary because the Bombes were unable to auto-
matically imitate the turnover action ofthe “E”
wheels. When Enigma wheels reached a certain
position, they “kicked” the adjoining wheel one or
more steps ahead, thus breaking the regular met-
ric motion ofthe Enigma.®” The Fire Engine
“hoppity” method was very crude, but very help-
ful. It allowed the use of weak menus and ones
which travelled over probable turnover positions.

GS+H51) Amore complex extension ofthe
commutator Bombe was Grandad, the double
unit Bombe. It had thirty-two, not just sixteen,
“E’s linked together. The use of twice as many “E”
units in Grandad decreased the probability that
anincorrect setting would result ina “hit.”
Arriving in Washington inlate 1944, Grandad

Page 177
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TOUS, AUS; CAN-SBICAND NEL —

permitted the use of much weaker cribs than
demanded by either the regular or the inverted
Bombes. It was designed to find solutions when a
set of short indicators was used as the crib, when
there were unknown stecker connections, or
when the crib consisted only of cipher letters that
were known to represent the same plaintext let-
ters.

(U) Beyond Cribs: the Statistical Bombe

(U) The most ambitious revamping ofthe
Desch Bombe was the Bulldozer. Delivered in
early 1945, ithad been desired, ifnot planned,
since the navy first accepted the commutator
Bombe in late 1942. It was a mechanical answer,
and avery clever one, tothe demands that “G”
move towards a pure attack on “E.”

(ASD Although everyone at OP-20-G had to
accept using acrib-based method against
Enigma, many argued for a continued search for
a “pure” attack. Some were committed to statisti-
cal analysis out of professional pride; others cau-
tioned against the danger ofdepending upon
Britain for cribs. They warned that if the Germans
tightened their security, even GC&CS could not
supply what the standard Bombes needed.*?

CISHST) In early 1943, asearch for what was
generically called a “statistical” solution was
begun, but it was avery limited effort.t° There
was too much else todo to allow anyone within
“G”’ to focus onan abstract problem. But when
there were hints insummer 1944 that the Allies
might not beable to count ongcod cribs inthe
future, more resources were poured into develop-
ing amachine for something very radical: a
cipher-only attack.”

CES++8b-Because at least a prototype machine
was desired as soon as possible, Joe Desch’s crew
was asked tosee ifa regular Bombe could be
turned into a “statistical machine.” It took some
time torefine the method and torevamp the
Bombes, but a Bombe to identify German plain

Page 178

language became operational in March 1945. It
was called Bulldozer because ofthe mechanical
power a cipher-only attack demanded.

LTS448_— The impressive Bulldozer was a
cross between the hardware ofa double Bombe
(Grandad), the logic of a Mercury Selector, and
the electronic analog circuits ofan IC machine.
Although it used asomewhat less mechanically
demanding “recognition” method than did
Mercury, Bulldozer’s power to identify probable
plain text was significant.

(487781) Much energy had gone into devising
the algorithms that had to be built into a crib-free
Bombe. Hundreds of hours were put into the
analysis of German military language. And “G’s”
best mathematicians spent weeks integrating
those findings with probability studies to arrive at
Bulldozer’s test for the appearance of plain text.**

CFS4/484) The method finally embodied in
Bulldozer demanded much that was new.
Bulldozer’s test began with the entry of the inter-
cepted cipher. Then the machine’s wheels were
spun. At each position, the letters that emerged
from the wheels were electrically weighted and
summed. Next, acomparison was made as to
whether the square of the weighted frequencies of
each letter summed to equal or exceed a value
that was typical of good plaintext messages. **

CFSH4SE The earlier statistical studies had
determined that Bulldozer needed along crib to
beable to differentiate random text from true
“language.” Thus, the machine was, like Grandad,
adouble Bombe. To give the new machine addi-
tional power to tell order from chance, its thirty-
two double banks of four-wheel “E” units could be
changed into sixty-four single units to accommo-
date alonger cipher. Bulldozer was also like the
Fire Engine: its banks were inverted. That was to
help make “hoppity” type runs. Significantly,
unlike the other Bombes, Bulldozer did not have
a diagonal board.”

“FOP SEERETHC CHIN FIREL-TO-USA AUS, GAN CBR ANE NEE
“TOP SEC RE THOTT THRE! PEPYS AHS Gils GB RAM O-NZLX 4

ett)
Bulldozer a a
J ,
Bombe ep eA
to icentify # sia
German
plain
language

S

€F8778D Bulldozer called onelectronics as
well as electromechanics. After the cipher had
been set on the machine’s dials, all the letters that
emerged from the commutators were sent toa
small bank of twenty-six tubes. They stored the
accumulated electrical weight: for each letter.
Before any of the wheels were moved, the value in
each tube was squared and passed to an analog
summing circuit. When the combined value of the
output from the commutators at a particular set-
ting exceeded the assigned threshold value, the
machine stopped and then did something quite
different from the other Bombes: it printed out
the full text ofthe deciphered crib ona
Letterwriter typewriter.

(¥67748P Bulldozer’s pure attack took more
time than a crib vs cipher one. At its very best, it
took twice as long to run a grenade test. That was
because its motor was set at one-half the typical
speed ofthe Bombes. That limitation was com-
pounded by the nature of Bulldozer’s tests. When
the frequency weighting system confronted an

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZOXI—

 

 

uncooperative cipher, the machine might stop
and type out probable clear text so frequently that
its running time increased to as much as eight
times that ofthe regular Bombes. That was one
reason it was rarely used for more than a grenade
run to establish starting points after all the other
Enigma settings had been discovered.

(48#/St) Full Bombe runs were much more
forbidding. Given the special assumptions that
had tobe made about the stecker ina full run,
Bulldozer might have to make as many as twenty-
six separate four-hour runs to produce asolu-
tion.*

€F5//55 Although it probably never broke an
Enigma system, the cryptanalysts were quite
impressed with Bulldozer. Its weighted test
seemed so promising for the future that “G's”
cryptanalysts informed OP-20 that a Bulldozer
attack might well make the navy’s own advanced
cipher machine, the ECM, vulnerable. Bulldozer

Page 179
FOP -SECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLHN4

seemed so able that “G” did not tell the British
about its powers until well after the war.*°

(U) No Escaping Electronics, Enigma Meets
the Cobra

(U) It was not afear of what the Germans
might possibly do with Enigma in the future but a
true emergency that finally drove the army and
navy’s cryptoservices to take a chance on large-
scale electronic machines. The emergency arose
in 1944. It was the German air force’s change in
the internal workings of its three-wheel Enigma.

GS4S5 Fortunately, the Germans had given
the British codemen some hints in late 1943 that
the Luftwaffe was going to switch to the use ofa
pluggable reflector. That had caused a great deal
of worry. Somewhat later, when the British
learned the German Army was todo the same,
worry turned into near panic.

€P37/SH The new reversing wheel was a
major threat. With the pluggable reflector, any
letter could be quickly rewired to produce any
other letter. Although the new reflector was sta-
tionary once it was placed within an Enigma, its
ability tobe any possible wheel made it worse
than the fourth wheel inthe M4. Ircalled for
examining anadditional 150,000,000,000,000
possibilities when attacking the air force’s and

3 fh.

army’s “three wheel” machines.

+ES+/68 The challenge was daunting, and
there were some thoughts of not even attempting
to conquer the pluggable wheel. But when it was
learned that the Germans would alter the wheel’s
wiring ona ten-day cycle, not every day or with
every message, adecision was made to face the
problem.*”

(484/5H The British were the first to attack
the new wheel. They did the best they could
against the German communications subsystems
which employed the new reflector, but the chal-
lenge was too much for their limited resources.

Page 186

Under the best conditions, ittook five top
Bletchley Park mathematicians two weeks of
“hibernation” toget asolution toa_ single
rewiring. The most powerful ofthe British
Bombes were oflittle help. Aslightly modified
one took sixteen days for a simple problem, and
the more elaborate Giant took three to four weeks
tocomplete afull menu. That meant that
Luftwaffe traffic could nolonger provide much
important tactical information. That traffic had
become vital to the Allies. With the end of the U-
boat war and the retreat of the German army into
the homeland where messages were carried by
cables, air force transmissions were a prime

source of radio intelligence. #8

€F87478H Atechnological solution was
required. But in mid-1944 the British were tired
and stripped ofresources; they needed help.
Unlike the situation in 1942, they did not hesitate
to inform their American cousins of the new dan-
ger and of possible methods of solution. The navy
was notified of the “seritcher” test, then the army.
Both American agencies immediately got to work
trying toturn the probability-based scritcher
method into hardware.

(U) The Navy’s Duerna

(FS++8H The navy’s first thought was to make
another simple modification ofthe commutator
Bombes. It was to be called “Mona.” Mona was to
have just one traditional Bombe wheel. The rest
ofthe Bombe was totest the huge number of
assumptions needed to try to identify the reflector
wiring and the stecker pluggings. Mona quickly
proved itself incompetent.*°

(484454) More thought went into the method
and possible machines. After modifying one of
the Enigma analogs at “G” by adding the “Cobra,”
an attachment that allowed the analysts to change
the reflector wirings by hand, “G's” analysts put
the British method through a series of explorato-
ry tests. Soon, they decided that only a two-wheel
test and agreat deal of electronics could do the

—-TORSECRETICOMATRELTOUSA-AUS.-CAN—-GBR-AND-NELI
SUT SCT IN REL TOUSA, AUS, CAN GE? IND-NZDHt—

 

 

<a) “Duenna

job. Preliminary specifications were drawn in
August. Then, very quickly, the proposed
“Duenna” was under construction atthe NCR
facility.

€FS7/SH Duenna became a twenty-foot-long
and eight-foot-high mixture of a small version of
atwo-wheel commutator Bombe and a cabinet
with over 3,000 advanced electronic tubes. The
first Duenna of November 1944 had to be huge
and cutting-edge because ofthe demands ofthe
scritcher test; so did its four sisters.™

CGS4HS) One of “G's” bright young mathe-
maticians, Howard Campaigne, made important
contributions tothe logic of scritching. ** His
modified OP-20-G* version of the British attack
was hardwired into Duenna’s complex circuits. It
was necessarily avery efficient attack, but it
demanded a great deal. It required as much as a
100-letter menu (cribs vs cipher pairings in this

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZDIXT-

 

 

 

case); itworked under the assumption that the
slow “E” wheel would not turn over at critical
points inthe menu; and, unless prior knowledge
allowed “G” toavoid it, afull test required as
many as fifty-six separate runs to test all the pos-
sible two-wheel combinations.

(E8//S8H Duenna demanded so much because
itwas expected towork much harder than the
original Bombes. The Bombes were pampered.
They were well fed with known wheel wirings and
the reflector plugging and asked to yield stecker,
rotor order, and, with some help, the window set-
ting. All that Duenna was told was the wheel
wirings. Yet itwas asked to produce the same
information asa successful Bombe run plus the
plugging pattern of the new reflector.

GSHSP Duenna’s job was tough, and it had

to be “smart.” With the crib in place, it made an
assumption about the stecker setting oftwo or

Page 181
—FOR-SEGRETHIGOMINFHREL-F6-USAAUSCAN-CBR ANE NZEHNT—

three high-frequency letters. Then, with its two
imitations of the faster “E” wheels, its electronics
serially tested the plain-crib pairs against succes-
sive combinations of stecker and reflector plug-
gings. Duenna had several electronic versions of
steckers and reflectors to perform those tests.>*

CFS//54) A stecker-reflector check for a given
stecker assumption took twenty minutes; an
average “run” took an hour and ahalf. But the
need torun different wheel combinations to iso-
late the fast wheel turnovers called for a day’s
work. The complete set of tests needed for diffi-
cult systems mizht keep a Duenna busy for two
weeks.

(iS/8t) Although Duenna had advanced
electronics and circuitry, it might have taken
much longer to do its job if the “scritcher” test had
not been so inherently intelligent. Other of “G's”
World War I{ machines had hardwired decision
algorithms, but Duenna had the most complex
one. Duenna’s smartness was based on sorne-
thing like the diagor.al board test: it looked for
contradictions orimpossibilities given the data
and assumptions fed into it. Its intelligence went
beyond the diagonal board’s, however. Because
the searching in Duenna fcllowed a logical pro-
gression, a“branch” ofa search could be abar-
doned very early. The machine did not have to
wait until all possibilities had been examined.
That saved enormous amounts of time.

“CPSYSD As the machine tested the assumed
and, then, the recovered steckers and reflector
links against the crib-plain pairs, it checked for
contradictions as well as building upa “recovery
number.” The recovery number was changed with
each sweep (step) through the “E” analog. That
number was compared with the reccvery score
from the previous sweep. If no additional recov-
eries of comratitle steckers and reflector plug-
gings had been made, Duenna’s circuits com-
pared the reccvery “buildup” number with a pre-
set threshold value. Tfthat value was exceeded,
Duenna tested for another critical factor. Ifthat

Page 182

“links and tacks” test was passed, Duenna printed
the information about its “hit” and went onto
search through another stecker assumption. If
the threshold was not met, Duenna skipped the
printing stage and went onto examine another
stecker assumption. °°

(FS47St) Although it was avery strange look-
ing combination, Duenna became a valuable tool.
Even before the first model was completed, the
navy ordered that several clones of the original be
delivered as soon as possible. The crew at Dayton
wished to build a more elegant machine, perhaps
with electronic wheels, but they followed
orders.°”

(S445) But there were attempts to persuade
“G” toallow the creation ofa full electronic
Duenna.>® Some looked upon the Duenna project
as the challenge that would force a do-or-die com-
mitment to such electronic components. But an
electronic “wheel” again proved too much ofa
challenge for its “E” wheels.

($8448) What was inside Duenna’s main cab-
inet was very different. The vacuum and gas-filled
tube circuits were innovative. There were high-
speed digital counting rings, “selection” matrices,
electronic stepping switches, and an electronic
version of the conflict-testing diagonal board sys-
tem. Duenna’s critical threshold testing circuit
was very advanced for the era, and the ability to
enter the crib via dial switches saved much set-up
time.®? Especially important, the Duennas proved
very ~“eliable and maintenance free.

(U) From Relays to Tubes, Rosen Gets His
Chance

(F5445B The SIS engineers under Leo Rosen
also found the pluggable reflector problem an
exciting challenge. In fact, it was the difficulty of
the problem that led the “F” section to become a
significent force inresearch and development.
The pressure onthe STS to deliver a machine to
help the British, combined with the decision not

“TFOP-SECRETHCOMNTIREL TO USK, AUS, CAN, GBR AND NZCIXT
“FOP-SECRETFHEOMINTFHREL-FO-UGA-AUES-CAN GBR EAD NZL

to hire an outside contractor as had been done
with Madame X, gave Rosen the power to require
the army tosend him acadre ofbright young
engineers who already had experience in
advanced electrical and electronic engineering.
Hevery quickly built upa remarkable group,
many of whom went on to become important fig-
ures in the postwar computer industry.”

(F84/5D Rosen had been notified of the plug-
gable reflector (Uncle Dick) threat in early 1944.
While the SIS cryptanalysts were put to work
scratching by hand methods, he and his close
aides, such as Captain C.R. Deeter,®’ began a
design for asupermachine. Like the navy’s engi-
neers, Rosen’s men thought electronics was the
logical route.°* Then they were forced to weigh
engineering ambitions against cryptanalytic
needs. The result was another compromise — the
relay Autoscritcher (also known as Grapevine) of
1944.°3 And even its follow-on, the electronic
Superscritcher, had to face up to the limits of dig-
ital electronics in the mid-1940s.

(CIS4/St) Because the German army and air
force “E” modifications were the same and
because Britain had provided both the American
army and navy with the same crypto-methods for
an attack, the logic and architecture ofthe SIS’s
device were similar to Duenna’s. But the hard-
ware was very different: alonger crib was used,
the build-up to a hit was different, and the test for
branching out of a search was simpler.** In sever-
al ways, the army’s relay Autoscritcher was more
ofa throwback than Duenna, and it was slow:
“running time was asmuch asten to fourteen
days, three shifts a day.” Although it performed
twenty-five tests asecond, asingle wheel order
test took three and one half hours.

(FS//8H The most incongruous part ofthe
Autoscritcher was its “wheel” unit which fulfilled
the same function as the rack of commutators in
the Duenna. The army machine had twenty banks
oftwo special Enigma wheels, not commuta-

—FOP-GEGRETHGOMINTHREL—FO-UG A AUS -GAN-GBRANE-NZLHA—

tors.°° Each served asthe moveable fast wheel
and as a static combination of the medium, slow,
and reflector wheels. These rotors were grouped
into sets which, along with allied relay circuits
and stepping switches, formed the basis for
“branch” testing.

(Es7#/8T) Tosave design and construction
time, no automatic stepping controls for those
rotors were included in the Autoscritcher. Given
the length of time it took the machine to search
through steckers and to test for contradictions, it
was thought®” hand-turning of the rotors would
be acceptable.

CES+/St) The Autoscritcher’s very long crib
was entered ona huge plugboard. Assumptions
based onfrequent cipher-plain pairs were
entered into the machine. Then abay of relays
and electromechanical stepping switches serially
tried all the possible steckers, passing control to
the two bays of electronic equipment. They
included the matrices that checked for diagonal-
board type contradictions. Along chain of crib-
plain pairs was used (each with its own rotor
pair). An analog threshold test made the final
decision as to whether a “hit” had occurred. That
test, however, was not ascomplex asin the
Duenna. And an operator had to copy the “hit”
settings by hand.

(U) Engineering Pride and Peacetime
Priorities

(8/781) The SIS engineers had begun the
Autoscritcher asa learning project. Once they
tested out their ideas with its older technology,
they expected to begin the design and construc-
tion of an electronic machine that would be more
useful and which would be a source of engineer-
ing pride. The goal was apurely electronic
machine that would be at least one hundred times
faster than the Autoscritcher.” °

(F8445_H The “F” group was given the
go-ahead for such amachine inearly 1945.

Page 183
~FOR-SEGRETHICOMHHHREL-TO-UGA-AUS--CAN-CBR-AND-NZEKT—

The machine soon acquired the name
“Superscritcher.” Its designers were thrilled when
they realized that it might beas much as 500
times faster than its relay predecessor.”°

(S445h) Designing new circuits was exciting
for the young engineers assigned to the “Super”
project. Although the “Super” had the same archi-
tecture asthe Autoscritcher, made similar hard-
wired “if” decisions, depended upon the plastic
and copper “E” wheels, and performed the same
type of cryptanalytic test, it was a far different and
more innovative fixed-purpose computer.” A
purely electronic stepping switch, improved elec-
tronic ring counters and circuits ” and electronic
controls for automatic stepping ofthe rotors
emerged before VE Day.

(FS77/S8P The electronics inthe “Super” were
not exclusively digital, but they were major
advances in the state ofthe art. Over 3,500 tubes
were mounted in eighteen eight-foot-high bays. A
large air conditioning system stood by to protect
them and the operators. There even was a means
for printing the settings when a “hit” was found.”

GS4H7/86 But the “Super” was not operable
when Germany surrendered, and the Enigma
traffic for which itwas designed disappeared.
There were demands that the project be aban-
doned. Fortunately for the “F” group’s morale,
the commander of Arlington Hall Station decided
that some useful function could be found for a
completed machine. He approved a continuation
ofthe prcjec*. Several stubborn electronic prob-
lems were overcome and the Superscritcher’s
power was turned on in December 1945. To the
surprise of many, it was used on various problems
for the next five years. And it did prove itself to be
500 times faster thai the Autoscritcher.”4

(U) Keeping the Faith: the Return of the
Film Machines

(U) The term “RAM” hed amore precise
meaning for some in OP-20-G and the SIS than

Page 184

“high-speed cryptanalytic machines.” Especially
for the army's engineers, RAM meant the type of
microfilm and photoelectric machines that Bush
had promised to Admiral Hooper in the 1930s, a
series of machines the SIS group came to want for
themselves by 1944. In fact, in 1944 it was the
army’s cryptanalysts, not the navy’s, who became
the strongest advocates for film-based devices. By
then, the navy’s men in “G” had become a bit wary
of both film-related technologies and the difficul-
ties involved in producing reliable microfilm. The
navy had not abandoned Bush’s ideas, but it
pulled back from Eastman Kodak and microfilm
in 1943. After Icky arrived, the navy did not order
any additional film machines, at least during the
war.”° One reason for that was the last one on its
1942-43 shopping list refused to be turned into
hardware in a timely way.

CBS What became known as “Amber” did not
arrive until late 1945. Ittook so long because of
the cryptanalytic difficulty of the system Amber
was asked to attack, as well as the stubbornness of
microfilm technologies.

(U) The Revenge of the Codes, Again

(TS4455 The Japanese JN25_ additive code
had led tosome desperation-driven technical
solutions at“G.” The many Copperhead I's
searched through thousands of messages in the
hopes of finding two identical cipher groups
spaced equally apart in two messages so that the
analysts might be able to identify “depths” and go
onto break into asystem. The huge and expen-
sive Mercury, with its walls of relays, was also an
example oftrying todo the impossible.
Thousands upon thousands of additives were
stripped every hour; then its huge memory was
searched for frequent code groups with only a
glimmer of hope that a hint of a possible solution
might emerge.

CFS445}) JN25 was not the only difficult and
demanding Japanese additive code system, how-
ever. By the last year ofthe war, the attempt to

—~TORSECRETICOMINTIRGLTOUSA_AUS-GAN-GBR-AND Natit —
—TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL TO USA, AUS CAN, GBR ANE NZDIXT

read the JN37 weather code continuously raised
more cryptanalytic and technological frustrations
than had the fleet system.

(FSAASH Reading the combined weather
report grew more and more important to the
American navy asit raced towards Japan. The
fleet was moving so fast that American weather
stations could not be established quickly enough.
The only good source of critical weather informa-
tion about many areas was the Japanese reports.
How valuable they were became tragically evident
when one of Admiral Halsey’s task forces was
caught bya typhoon inDecember 1944. The
storm took almost 800 American lives.” 7° If all
the Japanese reports had been read ina timely
way, the disaster might have been avoided.

4484455 JN37 seemed to be the most efficient
way totap the reports. Itwas the system the
Japanese used tobring together local weather
bulletins, then transmit them as a group. The sys~
tem was cryptanalytically strong, but it had a few
potentially exploitable weaknesses. The underly-
ing four-digit numeric code for the system
remained fairly stable throughout the war, and it
was known that the messages were very stereo-
typed. Cribs and code-meaning identification
were possibilities because temperature, humidity,
and wind speed remained much the same in var-
ious areas during aseason. That meant a great
deal of repetition of code groups.

€FSA+/5B Some JN37 variants had been read.
But there was a tough part to JN37, its superen-
cryption. There were many additives, and they
were frequently changed. With those changes
came blackouts, such asthose of 1944. Inthe
JN37 version that led toso much pain in that
year, the additive book had 900,000 entries.”

CPSH15P “37” had yielded, at times, to tradi-
tional tabulator methods supported by busts,
knowledge ofindicators, and captured data. As
long asthere were busts and captures, the old
methods worked. But even before the traumas of

—TOP-SECRETHICOMINTHREE FO USA AUS-6 ANGER ANE-NZLIE-

1944, there were serious concerns that more fre-
quent changes ofthe additive books and alter-
ations ofindicators might cause a permanent
lockout.

GS/4Spb In response, in early 1944 Howard
Campaigne, one of OP-20-G’s bright young math-
ematicians, began examining the practicality of
various pure attacks against JN37. He sought an
attack that did not depend upon knowing indica-
tors, tne additive book, or usual cribs. He experi-
enced much disappointment. For example, he
calculated that an Index of Coincidence assault
with existing equipment would take three years at
three shifts aday for any type of breakthrough.
Quite logically, he suggested asearch for better
methods and high-speed machines. There was
not much progress.”

GSA8P Then the cryptanalysts had some
good fortune. The discovery ofan active JN37
additive book gave some hope that a practical
method could be devised. The capture of the addi-
tive book allowed “G’s” best young mathemati-
cians and analysts to understand the logic of the
system used in 1944 and, among other things,
what the probabilities were that particular code
digits would appear in certain positions of mes-
sages. 7?

CGS7/SB A quite elaborate theory was devel-
oped, one based upon advanced Bayesian statisti-
cal methods. The statistician argued that if “G”
was willing to make avery costly investment in
calculating the “centiban” weights and creating a
machine to apply them, then atleast a minimal
but consistent entry into JN37 could be expected.
But the method seemed forbidding. It demanded
too much calculation.

GSHSp Other, perhaps less cumbersome,
methods of attack were explored, including the
dictionary lookup approach of Mercury. But they
stood little chance of producing results. By late
1944 the Bayesian “statistical crib” method of

Page 185
“TOP SECRETICOMINITREL, TO USA, AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZEDH

identifying acode group version of “plain text”
became the navy’s only hope.

CFS77SH The “statistical crib” method was the
kind that Hooper and Wenger wanted as the basis
for all of “G’s” work. It would use only cipher and
a “scientific” weighting system to pinpoint proba-
ble plain text and then point to additive “depth.”
From there, additional machine runs and statisti-
cal and craftsmen’s tests could be applied to re-
create the additive book and to quickly enter a
system.” *°

(FS//SH But in 1944 there was no machine
for the “statistical crib.” Although “G” had
attempted toestablish amachine program to
make the statistical methods practical earlier in
the war, little had emerged by the time the JN37
weather code became a priority at “G.” The lack of
results was one ofthe reasons why Wenger,
Engstrom, and Meader wanted their own crypt-
analytic machine “factory.” They were frustrated
by the slow pace at Eastman Kodak.

(FS/7St) Inearly 1943 Eastman had been
asked toexplore possible technologies for the
additive problems. “G” had requested film-based
machines for arange of functions. They wanted
ones to strip additives, match plain text to a code
dictionary, test for likelihood, perform statistical
weighting, and to print code meanings. *

€PS77/8BH Eastman took up the challenge. Ten
of the best men in Rochester were assigned to its
new RAM team. They were given agreat many
resources and much engineering latitude. They
explored many, perhaps too rany, logical and
technological alternatives.

CFS+/SH But nonew film “Japanese”
machines emerged from Eastman in1943 or

1944.
(U) Meanwhile, Lawrence Steinhardt began

work onhis versions of additive photoelectric
RAMs, calling upon the technica! expertise at

Page 186

Dayton when he needed practical advice. By the
time he turned his first designs into hardware, he
had become shy of film. His proposed punch-tape
Copperhead series was the outcome. He laid out
ideas for awide range of machines, ones to
implement the newest code-system attacks.

(FS4/SH Two ofthe proposed Copperheads,
Mark V and VI, for example, were aimed at mech-
anizing weight and dictionary attacks against
additive systems. Projects for them were begun,
but their complexity led to their abandonment.
The other designs also proved too complex. Only
Copperhead I,the “brute force” matching
machine, was made operational. As a result, “G”
was left without much in the way of additive RAM
machinery. It was not alone. The army also had
ideas of a film machine for the additive problem,
but it gave such amachine low priority before
1945.7

(¥84/SP Thus, when reading JN37 became an
imperative for the navy, there was no hardware in
place that seemed able to perform any of the pro-
posed cryptanalytic attacks, especially the one
that seemed best, the sophisticated but costly
“statistical crib” method.

(S445) There was another hurried search for
a “37” machine in 1944. None of the suggestions
seemed reasonable, and none were turned into
projects. The situation seemed hopeless. But at
the end of the year, it was declared that an answer
had to be found.

(U) More Numbers Than Ever Before

(SAASD A crisis team was put together to try to
foree atechnical solution. John Howard led the
navy group that consulted with the top engineers
atEastman and NCR. Hetold them ofthe
requirements ofthe new “statistical crib” attack.
Both groups then reviewed the technological pos-
sibilities. **

—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL- TO USK_AUS,CAN, GBR-AND NZI
-FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL-TFO-UGA-AUS-GAN-GERAND-NZLHNA

€577SH What Howard gave as the goals for
the new RAM was staggering. But that was
inescapable. The Japanese were changing the
JN37 additive book three times a year. To recov-
er the new books, Howard explained, called for
more calculations than “G” had ever attempted.
The pure “Monographic Statistical Method”
required, for example, 500,000,000 very com-
plex comparisons of cipher to “crib” to find one
correct line-up (the path to one correct additive).
To recover just 10 percent ofthe “37’s” additive
book within the first half ofits four-month life
called for six such searches a day.

(F8/78D The job was more difficult than just
looking for raw coincidences as the original Bush
machine had been built todo. The “Ideal”
machine John Howard wanted had to perform
more than 200 multiplications, summations, and
threshold tests for each ofthe half billion com-
parisons made during arun.** To complete those
trillions of operations six times aday called for
something beyond the Bombe, Mercury, or even
Duenna. Howard was calling for a supermachine.

(1S445B Even ifa technological answer was
found, building the superadditive machine would
be a gamble. All the calculation might be for noth-
ing. The eight weeks of3,000,000,000 daily
comparisons would yield a useful bit of informa-
tion only if all elements of JN37 besides the addi-
tives remained stable. Ifthe Japanese made
changes besides issuing anew additive book
every four months, the calculations might prove
useless. *°

(U) The gamble had to be made. The “G” engi-
neers, NCR’s men, and the Eastman group were
ordered to look at various technical options and
come up with a solution.

CPS77SP) One alternative was tobase a
machine on advanced digital electronic count-
ing/multiplying circuits. When estimates were
made ofthe speed ofthe best possible vacuum
tube machine, the results were shocking. It was

—TFEP-SEGRETIGOMHFHIREL—-F0-UG AAU E-GAN-GBR-AND-NZE—

found that just one run with the electronic digital
device would take sixteen years. When asked if
several copies of the device could do the job ina
reasonable time, the engineers responded that it
would be impossible just to find the parts needed
for enough of the machines. %

4577/5 Another possibility was to create a
new version ofthe proposed Full-Selector
machine. Instead of the weights being calculated
as the cipher was scanned, they would be stored
ina fast memory and retrieved for each of the
possible 60,000 different cipher combinations
that were expected to be encountered during a
run. The stored-weight alternative seemed attrac-
tive, but it called for ultrafast memory. Without it,
the stored-weight approach would take as long as
the on-the-fly calculations using electronic digital
circuits: years.

(FSHSH The “best” memory technologies,
such as delay-lines, seemed inadequate. So it was
decided to go back several steps. The only way to
achieve the needed speed, it seemed, was to rely
upon very densely packed high-speed tapes that
carried all the “weighting information” and upon
analog and parallel calculations. With the tapes,
the machine would not have to multiply; it would
just have to scan, search the memory, and sum.
And, if enough precision could be obtained, speed
could be vastly increased through the use of ana-
log “counting” — the machine would not have to
wait while digits were summed, one after the
other.

(ESA/SD All that seemed to dictate a return to
microfilm and photoelectric sensing and calcula-
tion. But it took many months to agree upon the
exact nature of the machine. NCR and Eastman’s
team agreed that the general microfilm RAM
approach should be followed, but there were sig-
nificant differences on many details. An impor-
tant one was whether the “weights” were to be
represented by different size spots (the NCR rec-
ommendation) or by degrees of opaqueness.

Page 187
“TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO USA AUS--CAN-GBR-ANB- NZL

4455) The debate went on far too long. It
was not until the summer of 1945 that agreement
was reached and the Eastman team’s approach to
what became known as “Amber” was chosen.
That did not allow enough time to create an oper-
ational machine. Amber was not to appear until
the war had ended.*”

87/55 Eastman’s proposed Amber was to
bea photoelectric comparator, following in the
traditions of Icky and Hypo. It had four scanning
photocells that tested two 70mm repeatedly off-
set and superimposed films against a coincidence
threshold. It used the familiar analog circuits but
with a sophisticated twist: both positive and neg-
ative photosensing was used.**

€E64/55 Amber was to have 2 relatively large
viewing field so that a long string of code could be
tested instantly. It was designed to test eight hun-
dred characters asecond. The long field would
give Amber speed and more. Itincreased the
probability that “false hits” wou'd be eliminated.
More than that made Amber powerful; it had a
very special way of implementing the weighting
methods used to automatically identify probable
“plaintext.” The “dots” on one ofits films repre-
sented the weights through varying densities.

(FS4/8B Those variable densi-ies called for
much tobe added tothe older “dct” cameras
Eastman had made for Icky and Hype. A special
card reader and camera combination was devel-
oped. Amber’s camera was a sophisticated exten-
sion of the light-bank system that had been devel-
oped earlier in the war for machines like Icky. As
the weight cards were read, one of twenty differ-
ent voltages was applied tothe tiny lamps to
achieve the variable densities. Its developers
knew that it would bea major chore to keep the
system intune, but that was inescapable. More
than the camera was demandiry. The data were
so densely packed that extra car? had te be taken
at every step offilm preparaticr anc develop-
ment.

Page 188

GS7/SH In addition, the older analog sum-
ming and threshold circuits had to be revised. But
Amber was not to be a completely new machine.
Only the changes to the older Icky and Hypo con-
cepts that were absolutely necessary were incor-
porated. Thus, Amber had much of the crudeness
of the Icky. When Amber’s films were placed in its
Icky-like projector, ifenough of the code groups
had clear “dots,” Amber would just stop.”

(ESLA84 Amber’s design was very demand-
ing. [It needed controlled humidity and correctly
monitored ambient lighting. And its film trans-
ports had tobe much more precisely adjusted
than Icky’s or Hypo’s. One reason for the narrow
tolerances was that the very expensive master
films containing the “weights” would wear out if
there was the slightest friction.°° Those master
films were precious because they carried the crit-
ical “weights” that were so labor intensive and dif-
ficult to calculate.

(#387754) Amber’s creators convinced “G”
there was no alternative but to accept the great
burdens the “master film” design required. The
cryptanalysts knew that the preparation of each
log-odd weight film called for millions upon mil-
lions of multiplications. Those assigned to the job
feared they would never be able to keep up with
the task. Although they had the tabs, including a
special Multiplier, the job of preparing the long
card decks tofeed the special film-generating
camer seemed overwhelming. Ashort twenty-
three-character message needed almost two mil-
lion multiplications for its weight film.” It took
over 800 hours oftabulator and IBM electro-
mechanical multiplier time to create a typical
deck. And each ofthe different types of JN37
messages needed more than adozen ofits own
“probabilities” films.?* Unfortunately, a hoped-
for emergency project to create an electronic mul-
tiplying machine could not be initiated, and “G”
had to accept the prospect of thousands of hours
of calculations to prepare for Amber’s arrival.%*
Perhaps it was for the best that Amber was deliv-
ered just after the war with Japan was concluded.

—FOP-SECREFICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-HEZE-
FOP-SEERETHEOHINTHRELT40-UEA-AUS--CAN-GB RANG. NZL.

FSS) Amber did not achieve all the goals
set for itin 1945, but it was eighty times faster
than the proposed digital electronic JN37
machine. And it could be modified to perform
other than the “weight” test. Itdid asimple
round-robin test ofevery message ina group
against every other 1,000 times faster than the
NCR-Gray Comparators. But its 800 compari-
son-a-second rate (the original goal had been
35,000 asecond) ** meant that atypical run for
the “37” attack might have, at the very least, taken
twenty-four hours.”®

(FS4/SB Because of Japan’s defeat, there
would beonly two Ambers,®° not the twenty
Howard Engstrom had sought earlier in the year.
Some remodeling was needed in 1947,°’ but the
Ambers proved useful into the 1950s.%*

(UV) Dr. Bush, Your Best Friend Is Really the
Army

€FS445H The contract for Amber was not a
signal that OP-20-G had regained its faith in pho-
toelectric machines. Its frustrations with it and
the Gray-NCR Comparator led toa belief that a
long development cycle would be necessary
before Bush’s ideas could be turned into the pow-
erful and reliable machines Joseph Wenger and
Admiral Hooper had longed for in the mid-1930s.
Although “G” added an electronic “rare-event cir-
cuit” to the Gray Comparators and had Icky refur-
bished, it did not return to Eastman or Gray for
more machines during the war.?

(8745) By 1944 the lack of orders from the
navy led Eastman to consider reassigning most of
its RAM team, leaving only the Amber group in
operation.*°° Then the army saved the day.

(S465 Some ofthe SIS’s engineers had
become devoted fans of Bush’s visions, and by
late 1944 they were laying plans for a whole series
of microfilm-electronic RAMs, a series that went
beyond what the navy had once imagined. They
even requested astatistical Rapid Selector: a

FOP-SEGRETICOMNTHREL-FO-USAAUS-CAN-O BRAND -NZEDE—

machine that married microfilm with electronic
counting. And by early 1945 their belief in film led
to a request that a new camera be constructed to
allow the arrmy’s Gray-NCR Comparator to
become afilm rather than a punched-tape
machine. The SIS had experienced so many prob-
lems with the punches that it was searching for
any way possible to prolong the operational life of
the Comparator. *”

S485) Although it never acquired all that its
engineers desired, somewhat ironically it was the
army, not the navy, that fulfilled Bush’s dream of
a “statistical” Rapid Selector. By 1945 the SIS-
Eastman teams put electronic counting together
with microfilm. And they continued on after the
war to be the sponsors of the most far-reaching
attempts to create film-based machines for crypt-
analysis.

(S/4SH- Friedman’s team had begun its
romance with RAMs in early 1943 when the navy
allowed the SIS to piggyback orders for afew
machines onto the navy’s contracts.*°* Close to
$200,000 changed hands very quickly for the
purchase of IC plate devices, a tetragraph tester
and, later, aGray-NCR Comparator. The first
purchases were just that, purchases. The SIS
played no role in the design of the machines. But
after the RAMs began to arrive in late 1943, the
SIS wanted amore powerful voice in machine
design.

(87751) Within less than a year, a subcommit-
tee was formed by those in “F” who had become
strong advocates of the film-based devices. Many
ideas for new RAMs emerged. Eastman soon
began creating an SIS version of Hypo (their film
Dudbuster) and an upgrade on the Tessie. There
were more ambitious plans. The SIS was develop-
ing ideas for afilm version ofa Slide Run
machine, an Icky for the Fish traffic, and a special
type of Amber. A budget request of $75,000 for
research was approved. In addition, funds were
allocated for the initial development stages of at
least three new machines.

Page 189
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS; CAN-GERANE-NZLHK4

(8/735 Only one of those proposed machines
was constructed, but some unexpected film
RAMs appeared atthe SIS during late 1944 and
early 1945.77?

(TS4/8D One of those surprises wes the result
oflashing together the army’s version ofthe
35mm Icky and the electronic «visite; used on
the Gray-NCR Comparator. Only one of these
unnamed machines was built, but it pleased the
SIS analysts and encouraged them to rnake more
modifications to existing devices. The army’s
Tessie, for example, was significantly upgraded. It
was made more efficient, but, more importantly,
it was made to automatically return to the point
on the films where a sought-after complex code or
cipher pattern was located. Furthermore, anew
camera allowed itto use the “blsckou*” test for
brute-force searches. Later, a rare reliable card-
to-film converter was requested.*”*

(U') The Great 5202

~<FS45B While the older RAMs were being
updated, Eastman was busy with the SIS’s major
RAM contribution, the “5202.” The 3°02 was the
machine for the Fish system that hac been rec-
ommended in 1944. It became the mos? sophisti-
cated and powerful of all the fil; RAM machines
of World War I! and after. In fact, the 5202 effort
can be considered tobe the major catalyst in
keeping Eastman-Kodak together after the war.
Although it was completed and sent to England
too late to make its mark against Germany, the
5202 was used throughout the :940s"°° and was
used to attack the German Teray ~tiphering

Le
Mecaine.

(ES4/SB- Among the 5202’s zvaneed features
was its much-improved cemera system. It took
the light-bank principle far beyond the previous
versions. Very important, it could pack the pat-
terns generated byanalogs of encryption
machines much more densely thar. earlier mod-
els. As important, the circuits al’ied with the pat-
tern gene~ators allowed great flexibility in select-

Page 190

ing the data transmitted tothe camera. Creating
complementary code patterns, for example, was
very easy. The camera system went far towards
solving a major problem of all the older film sys-
tems: the great amount of time it took to gener-
ate the films.’

CFS#/8D) The 5202's heart, its reader, was also
atechnical improvement over the previous
Eastman RAMs. Optics were improved. In combi-
nation with the dense packing onthe films, the
improved sensing systems allowed ten times the
number of characters to be tested at once as on
the other film RAM. The 5202’s span of 500
columns was impressive. That made 5202 a more
robust cryptanalytic aid than the other RAMs
with their relatively short viewing gates.

CFS -Sb-The 5202 was also versatile. It could
be used to “locate” desired patterns as well as to
make Comparator-like counts onits electronic
banks. It could hold as many as four films ata
time; two ofthose were motor driven.
Furthermore, its drive mechanisms were
extremely fast and could step films in many dif-
ferent patterns.

CES//SB The unique feature of the 5202 that
gave ittne potential tobe as valuable asthe
British Robinsons or Colossi was its ability to test
two fields of data at the same time. That allowed
itto perform the special cryptanalytic test it
embodied. The 5202 could demand that no con-
tradictions in two fields be found at the same time
that ore or more “confirmations” were located.
To dc that, the 5202 contained sensing and test-
ing circuits that sought electrical balance among
three photocell circuits."°”

CIS/4Sh Although designed for the German
teletypewriter problem, many different applica-
tions were found for the 5202. It was used asa
statistical dudbuster, for example.

-FOR-GEGRETICOMINFTIREL-TOUSR-AUS- CAN, GBR AND NZCIAT
(U) Beyond the Comparators

€PS//SH Well before the 5202 was delivered,
the SIS was drawing up plans for yet another new
generation of 7omm film RAM. Their immediate
target was to be Japanese code systems, but the
machines were intended to be pathbreakers toa
new era in microfilm devices.

84/54) The first request was for a much
enhanced Eastman version of Steinhardt’s
Copperhead I. That would allow high-speed
searches through very long portions of text (hun-
dreds of characters rather than only the thirty in
Tessie). Next came arequest for anew type of
5202, one toperform isomorphic tests. Most
important, according to the “F” group, was a film
Slide Run machine with very advanced electron-
ics. It was to be 100 times more powerful than the
relay-based IBM versions.

GSHS) The requests explained that each
machine was urgently needed for attacks on
Japanese weather and army codes. But the “F”
group, to be credible, had to acknowledge that it
might take some time to develop the new RAMs —
perhaps too long given the signs that the Pacific
war was winding down. To avoid losing their
machines, they provided athorough analysis of
the role of film computation in SIS’s future, hop-
ing that even if the request for specific machines
was rejected, research funding would continue. *®

S44SH) Emphasizing that it was crucial to
keep the RAM group at Eastman together, “F”
asked for enough money to sustain, at the least, a
research effort in Rochester for several years.
They admitted that the machines they needed
were more of a challenge than the 5202, but they
said the future of SIGINT demanded new
RAMs.'°?

(U) The Machine That Wasn't

(S4#4S5H There was one challenge that “F”
group did not attempt to meet, a possible RAM

TOR-SECRETHICOMHHHREL-TO-UEA-AUE—GAN-GEROANE-NZE

that was not even mentioned during the war - a
machine for traffic analysis. Neither the army nor
the navy tried to create a machine for “data pro-
cessing.” The absence of massive fast memories
and rapid input-catput equipment meant that lit-
tle attention was paid to creating a revolutionary
data processing engine. A “data” machine had to
wait until agency priorities changed and until
computer readers, printers, and memories with
capabilities far beyond those ofthe early 1940s
emerged.

(U) Notes

1.(2S483 Axlimpse into the complexity of the
weighting methods is found in 8 NSA CCH XII Z,
Lt. A. H. Clifford to Lt. J.H. Howard, “Full Selector:
operation oi. a four digit code group differences,” 22
February 1945. When asimilar method was used
against the Japanese weather systems, the required
calculations to arrive at the weights for the “statistical”
attack proved sonumerous that the cryptanalysts
asked that an electronic multiplying machine be con-
structed. (F54/Si) NSA CCH Series XII Z,R. A.
Rowley, “Preparation of Weighting Film, Secondary
Stage Problem,” OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

2. S754) The use oflog weights to estimate
whether or not plain language was appearing asthe
result ofa decryption process was well established by
mid-war. The Gee-Whizzer had been built around the
idea. £846485- NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel §.Snyder, 24
February 1989. Tine very innovative Bulldozer (dis-
cussed below) was aBombe version ofthe method.
2S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, CITS Paper TS-30,
“Bulldozer Supplementary Manual,” Navy Dept.,
Washington, November 1945.

3. FSAASB- =ONSA CCH Series VII ZL. R.
Steinhardt, “Possible Engineering Solutions for Full
Selector Problem,” OP-20-G-4-A5, 23 November
1944. The “M” engineering group had kept in touch
with all Allies’ computer and electronic development
projects of World War II. The failure to mention elec-
trostatic memory inthe JN25 problem reports was
perhaps not a result of ignorance but of a knowledge of
both the primitive stage of development ofthe tech-

Page 191
FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREE-TFO-USA-AUS-CAN- GBR AND-NZEIMT

nology and the unlikelihood that potentially fast elec-
trostatic memories would hold large amounts of infor-
mation. Useful for insights into memory technology of
the era is James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary of
Data Processing Technology (New York: Greenwood
Press, 1987).

474468 NSA CCH XII Z, OP-20-G-4-A,
“Electronic Matrices,” 19 Septembes 1944.

5.¢8) Such a “memory” was not uncommon at the
time.

6.(TS74SR NSA CCH Series XH Z, Samuel 5S,
Snyder, “Famous First Facts, NSA: Pact 1, Pre-
Computer Machine Cryptanalysis.”

7. GAS NSA CCH XII Z, OP-20-G-4-A,
“Electronic Matrices,” 19 September 1944.

&. (U) The highly significant Duenna project is dis-
cussed below.

9. (U) On the tube reliability zuestion and the suc-
cess of their use inthe machine that ‘s generally held
to be the “first” electronic computer (although it had a
special-purpose architecture), see Nency Stern, From
ENIAC to UNIVAC: AnAppraiscl ofthe  Eckert-
Mauchly Computers (Bedford, Mass: Digital Press,
1981). The ENIAC had some 18,006 tubes and a very
high downtime because of that.

10. (8) Ideas for use of photecells and glass plates
were suggested in some of the NDR© fire-eontrol pro-
posals. Those seemed impractical to Steinhardt.

i. (BSH NSA CCH XII @, OP-20-G-4-A,
“Electronic Matrices,” 19 September 1944.

12. (U) Louis A. Gebhard, Evoluticn ofthe Naval
Radic-Electronics and Contributias ofthe Naval
Research Laboratory, (Washington, 0.C.: Naval
Research Laboratory, 1979), 326-8, also displays a
very advanced German acetate tape system that was
captvred during the war.

13. CUSL46 NSA CCH Series XII ZL. R.
Steinhardt, “Additive Machines: E‘stcrical Summary
of.” 27 November 19044. %8) Lt. A. H. Clifford to Lt. H.
H. Howard, “Full Selector: operation on 4-digit code
group differences,” 22 February 1345. &). NSA CCH
Series XII 2, “Conferences at Dayton,” 11 Lpril 1945.

14. (U) OP-20-G and the engineers at STS were not
the only Americans searching for appoznate “com-
puting technologies” to meet escalcting demands. See
for example, Chapters two and three, in Kent C.

Page 192 cs >

Redmond and Thomas M. Smith, Project Whirlwind:
The History ofa Pioneer Computer (Bedford,
Massachusetts: Digital Press, 1980).

15. TS44SH NSA CCH XII Z, Conferences at
Dayton,” 11 April 1945. Interviews with Phil
Bochicchio, June 1994. (U) W.W. Stifler, Jr. (ed.)
High Speed Computing Devices: Bythe Staff of
Enginecring Research Associates, Inc. (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company Inc., 1950), 346.

16. (644SD NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Conferences at
Daytor.,” 11 April 1945. Lt. Reid was also important to
the project. The same type of selector problem drove
OP-20-G back tofilm machines. But the Eastman-
Kodak “Amber,” described below, was created for the
Japanese weather systems.

17. £3 NCML had received aGerman magnetic
disk sometime late in the war, but magnetic disks were
already known to Americans. Like the computer itself,
magnetic disk technology was “in the air.”

18. CS+481) NSA CCH Series XII Z CNO CITP TS-
32, “Mercury,” Washington, D.C.: Navy Department,
December, 1945. (R) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Mercury,” May 1953.

19. (TS¥461) NSA CCH Series XII Z CNO CITP TS-
32, “Mercury,” Navy Department, Washington, D.C.,
December, 1945. “RL NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Mercury,” Mav 1953.

20. SAS NSA CCH Series X11 Z,CNO, “Brief
Descriptions of RAM Equipment,” Washington, D.C.:
Navy Department, October 1947, 14.

21. (LS4481) Mercury also had an electronic circuit
that cculd set and record the “slides” the collator per-
formed.

22.(F3¢45H NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO, “Brief
Descriptions of RAM Equipment,” Navy Department,
Washington, D.C.: Navy Department, October 1947,
14.

23. (FOUEI) NSA CCH Series XU Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Conrputers,” nd. Mercury was
retired ip March 1949.

24. £E84/5R NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Report of 3
January 1944 by Lt. L. Steinhardt: JN157 Rattler.”

or, C£S/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z“Report of 3
January i944 by Lt. L. Steinhardt: JN157 Rattler.”
FOP-SECRETHCOMNTHIREL TO USK AUS_CAN GE it Ait NZEK

26. €F9/3TT NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Memorandum of3 January 1944 From Lt. L.
Steinhardt, Another Idea for Rattler,” 5 January 1944.

27. (PSA‘SD OP-20-G-43, “FINAL REPORT,
Project M-242, Rattler.”

28. ($4481) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Inventories of
RAM Equipment, 1945. (F54/5R NSA CCH Series XT
Z, “Office of Computers, List of Computers,” nd. (U)
NSA RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications,
CITP TS-6 “Rattler,” Washington, D.C., circa 1945.
NSA NCML-CSAW Message File, October 22, 1943,
Steinhardt to G, “Viper Design”; November 24, 1943,
Ely to Desch, “Design of plugboard to automate Viper
stecker analysis” and August 14, 1943, “Python tobe
shipped to Washington.”

29. (S448 NSA CCH Series XII ZL. R.
Steinhardt, “General Purpose Machine (SERPENT),”
OP-20-GE, 29 September 1944.

30. (U) It is important to note that Steinhardt did
not mention the Robinsons, which were multitape
machines. Perhaps that was because he had not been
told of them.

31. (SL44H) NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R.
Steinhardt, “General Purpose Machine (SERPENT),”
OP-20-GE, 29 September 1944.

32. (SA45t) NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R.
Steinhardt, “General Purpose Machine (SERPENT),”
OP-20-GE, 29 September 1944, 4.“Rattan problems
will demand a truly versatile machine in the early ana-
lytic stages. One such problem (involving something
like the proposed “Imagination Machine”) is new cur-
rent; this could be handled very nicely on Serpent.” By
the end of the war, a traditional type of analog machine
was built for one ofthe Russian devices. The
Americans called their machine “Ricky.”

33. €684455 NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G
“War Diary Reports: March 1, 1943-May 31, 1948,”
August 1945.

34. (U) David J. Crawford, The Autoscritcher and
the Superscritcher, forthcoming, The Annals of the
History of Computing ,NARA RG457, SRH-361.
“History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two,
The General Cryptanalytic Problems,” 269-270. NSA
RAM File, CNO, U.S. Naval Communications, CITP-
TS-39, “Duenna Operations Manual,” March 1946,
and TS-20 “Bulldozer Operating Manual.”

TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL TO USAAUS-CAN-GBRANB-NZEI—

35. €P87 ‘SD NSA CCH Local Archive, “Army-Navy
Descriptive [Lictionary of Cryptologic Terms,” Army
Security Agency, February 1947, 131, defines scratch-
ing asthe testing ofassumptions by examining its
implicatioas for cnitradictions, eliminating those with
contradictions, th: “scoring” the remainder.

36. S774 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Tentazive
Brief Description cf General Analytic Equipment for
Enigma Problems,’ 26 March, 1945. f[4304] 9.

37. GSé4i3 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Tentative
Brief Description of General Analytic Equipment for
Enigma Problems,” 26 March, 1945. {[4607] f[4142]
129 f[4149].

38. (P5445 NSA CCH Series XII Z, (S12008)
Navy Depi., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G), RIP 425, “The American Attack on the
German Naval Cip!:ers,” October 1944 [sic], 129. GS
NSA AHA ACC 17480, CNO CITS TS-17, “The N-800
Bombe,” V/ashington, circa 1946. EFS} (S2568) NSA
CCH Series Xii 4,“Tentative Brief Description of
General Analytic Equipment for Enigma Problems,”
26 March 1945.

39. (S481) NSA AHA ACC 35173, (CNO, CITS
TS-49, “A Posteriori Remarks onthe Cryptanalytic
Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,” Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946. (TS//ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-
20 to King, Duenna. £84456 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Wenger to OP-20, io March 1945, “Statistical Bcmbe-
Installation of.”

40. (F8445D NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G,
“Memorandurs, Statistical | Bombe—Successful
Installation of,” 10 March 1945. Astatistical grenade
was the first goal. (ES} NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO,
CITS TS-49, “A Posteriori Remark onthe
Cryptanalytic Aspects of the Bulldozer,” Navy Dept.,
Washington, September 1946.

41. (TSA43—8- NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G,
“Memorandum, Statistical Bombe—Successful instal-
lation of,” 10 March 1945.

42. F846 NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS,
TS-49, “A Posteriori Remarks on the Cryptanalytic
Aspects of the Bulldozer,” Washington: Navy Dept.,
September 1946, 3.

43. (TS778T) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-
49, “A Posteriori Remarks onthe Cryptanalytic
Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,” Washington: Navy Dept,

Page 193
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TC-USAAUS-CAN-GBR-ANB-NZEHH

September 1946, pages 3and S8give the “weights”
assigned to each letter based upon analysis of Enigma
traffic.

44. (TS77SH NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-
49, “APosteriori Remarks onthe Cryptanalytic
Aspects ofthe Bulldozer,” Navy Dept., Washington,
September 1946, points out that the practical limit in
the machine was a forty-five-letter <ipher because of
the probabilities of Enigma wheel turnovers.

45. (TS#4SB NSA CCH Series XII Z,CNO, CITS
Paper TS-30, “Bulldozer Supplementa:’ Manual,”
Washington: Navy Dept., Novemher 1945. Because
cipher-only attacks could produce so many false hits,
using Bulldozer on tests for wheel order and stecker
led to extraordinarily time-consuming print checking.
The unknown stecker was the truly difficult problem.
(TS) NSA AHA ACC 35173, CNO, CITS TS-49, “A
Posteriori Remarks on the Cryptanal:. ‘ic Aspects of the
Bulldozer,” Navy Dept., Washington, September 1946.

46. €F5//Sbr NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports. 10-45-1949.” The
Americans had not yet told the British about the
Bulldozer in 1947. Onthe fears about the security of
the ECM, (NSA CCH Series X!' 7%, OP-20-G to
Admiral King, “This may develop.”

47. &SAS]) NSA CCH Series X!I Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, indicates that the pluggable reflector was prima-
rily a Yellow system machine. (ES4/SR NSA (CCH
Series XU Z, EH. H. Campaigne and J.T. Pendergrass,
“Second Report on Cryptanalytic "se o* High Speed
Digital Computing Machines,” O°-22-L., .§ December
1025, Appendix 1, shows that both the German Army
and Air Force were beginning to use the: new reflector.
The OP-20-G cryptanalysts built Duenna onthe
assumption that each problem would take 5 x 10 to the
sixth power tests. £3) NSA CCH Series XJi Z, OP-20-
GMF, “Report: Proposed Design fer Dvenna. Mark
One,” 25 February 1944.

48. (ES+48T7 NSA CCH Ser'es XII Z, “Uncle
Walter,” circa 1945.

49. (SA48— NSA CCH Series X11 2, F.AM list and
Conference at Dayton, 11 April 1945

50. £ISA4SB NSA CCH Series: XI Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, “Duenna.” ($+ NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-

Page 194

GMF, Report: Proposed Design for Duenna Mark
One,” 25 February 1944, 11.

51. (F544) The most complete descriptions of
Duenna and its allied cryptanalytic process are found
in G8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, CNO CITS Paper TS-39
“Duenna Operations Manual,” Washington, D.C.:
Navy Dept., March 1946; (@f NSA CCH Series XII Z,
CNO, CITS Paner TS-39 “Duenna, Theory Manual,”
Washington, D.C.: Navy Dept., July 1946; 4 NSA
CCH Series XII Z,OP-20-GMF, “Report: Proposed
Design for Duenna Mark One,” 25 February 1944; NSA
AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS-39 “Duenna Electrical
Circuits,” July 1946.

52. S45) NSA CCH “P” Collection Box CCO 67,
RIP 608, CITS Paper TS-10/E-6, Enigma Series Vol. 6,
Duenna,” CNC-OP-20, January 1946, contains the
technical description of “G’s” version of the scratching
attack.

53. CES++64) NSA CCH Series [V B-1-2, History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem, 268, implies that three differ-
ent methods were developed by OP-20-G and SIS for
the reflector problem and that the SIS attack and
machines were significantly different from “G’s.” It
also states that GC&CS’s Giant machine embodied the
SIS attack.

54. (7 NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-GMF,
“Report: Proposed Design for Duenna Mark One,” 25
February 1944, 12.

55. (TSe461) NSA CCH “P” Collection Box CCO 67,
RIP 608, CITS Paper TS-10/E-6, “Enigma Series Vol.
6, Duenaa,” CNC-OP-20, January 1946, 6-3. Note that
quite a different run time needed for Duenna to solve
aproblem is given ir (284431) NSA CCH Series IV B-
1-2, “History ofthe Signal Security Agency, Volume
Two: The General Cryptanalytic Problem,” 269. It
states that it took Duenna two weeks to test “all con-
stantetiors” ina problem. The vast difference in time
estimates isdne to different definitions of “problem”
and attac®.

£6. GSAS NSA CCH Series XII Z, H.H.
Campsigre and J.T. Pendergrass, “Second Report on
High Sneed Dizital Computing Machines,” OP-20-L,
18 December 1946, Appendix I. GA44) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, OP-20-GMF, “Report: Proposed Design
for Duenna Mark One,” 25 February 1944, contains a
FOP-SECRETHCOMNTTREL-FC USAAUS, CAN, SERED WZOAT

useful description of the Duenna menuing and ofits
printing system. The search and test logic is explained
in, NSA AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS-39 “Duenna
Electrical Circuits,” July 1946, 7-11.

57. (LS4481) NSA CCH Series XII Z, (12008)

Navy Dept., Office of Chief of Naval Operations, DNC
(OP-20-G, RIP 425, “The American Attack on the

German Naval Ciphers,” October 1944 [sic] FS} NSA
CCH Series XH Z,CNO CITS Paper TS-39 “‘Duenna
Operations Manual,” Washington, D.C.: Navy Dept.,
March 1946, shows how the commutators’ sensing sys-
tems were modified to fit the Duenna problem.

58. /5B NSA CCH XII Z, OP-20-G-4-A,
“Electronic Matrices,” 1-9 September 1944. £14253]

59. LS+/8T) NSA AHA ACC 25057, CNO CITS TS-
39 “Duenna Electrical Circuits,” July 1946, 13, 32, 44.

60. (U) David J. Crawford and Philip E. Fox (ed.),
“The Autoscritcher and the Superscritcher: Aids to
Cryptanalysis of the German Enigma Cipher Machine,
1944-1946,” IEEE, Annals ofthe History of
Computing ,vol. 14, No. 3,1992, 9-22. The
Autoscritcher seems to have come into operation in
early 1945, some months after Duenna had been
brought to life.

61. GS¢4H1) NSA CCH Series [V B-1-2, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem,” 269.

62. CISL455H NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine, History of
the Development Branch,” 10 February 1953, 76.

63. (FS47ST) NSA CCH Series IV B-1-2, History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Two: The General
Cryptanalytic Problem, 269, gives the date of first
operation as Christmas 1944.

64. (57/8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,”
September 1954.

65. GSA45B NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,”
September 1954. £28) (S2568) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Tentative, Brief Description OfGeneral Analytic
Equipment for Enigma Problems,” 26 March 1945.

66. €F64/S1) One bank was required for each
cipher-plain pair being tested. CES} NSA AHA ACC
11254, “OP-20-G, “Army Autoscritcher,” 29 March
1945.

67. (U) David 3. Crawford and Fhilip E. Fox (4.),
“The Autoscistche: and the Superscritcher: Aids to
Cryptanalysis cf the German Enigma, Cipher Machine,
1944-1946,” :ZEE, Annals ofthe History of
Computing , -ol. 14, No. 3, 1992, 12.

68.-4F 7S) NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA, “History of
the Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine, History of
the Development Branch,” 10 February 1953, 78.
Although the macine proved difficult to maintain, it
was used against “=” traffic and, then, attached to the
003 tofusction asa crib dragger for Swiss Enizma
problems. €£$} (:2568) NSA CCH Series Xii Z,
“Tentative Brief Description of General Analytic
Equipmen: f2. Enigma Problems,” 26 March 1945, has
an explanation 0° the use of the “cups.”

69. (U} David J. Crawford and Philip E. Fox (ed.),
“The Autoscritcher and the Superscritcher: Aids to
Cryptanalysis cf t:e German Enigma Cipher Macliine,
1944-1946,” TEEE, Annals ofthe History of
Computing , vol. 14, No. 3, 1992, 15. (S446 NSA AHA
16899N, Arimy Service Forces, C.R. Deeter, “General
Specifications and Technical Description: Super-
Scritcher,” 13 January 1945.

70. (E8765) NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA, “History of
the Signal S2cur.ty Agency, Volume Nine, History of
the Development Sranch,” 10 February 1953, 80.

71. 4451) NSA AHA 16899N, “Super-Scritcher:
System and Circuit Details,” points tothe innovative
ways the engineers avoided many of the pitfalls of
purely digital circuits.

72. (SH#) NSA AHA ACC 16899N, Harry B.
Smith, “Ring of Modified Eccles-Jordan Trigger
Circuits,” 12 January 1945.

73. (U) Many of the electronic circuits were clever
variants of digital designs, especially those designed to
circumvent the need for hundreds of tubes to imitate
orsense rotor signals. See (FS NSA AHA ACC
16899N, Army Service Forces, David J. Crawford,
“Frequency Sensing in Rotor Outputs: Super-scritch-
er,” 17 January 1945. (TS4455 NSA CCH IX.B.1.9, SSA,
“History of the Signal Security Agency, Volume Nine,
History ofthe Development Branch,” 10 February
1953, 81.

74. CESA4GD-NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

Page 195
 

75. (FS4/SR After the war OP-20-G did order an
upgrade on ICKY, and Eastman reworked Amber and
Hypo. 8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.” But
there was much discontent with film and the mainte-
nance problems of the devices.

76. (U) Samuel Eliot Morison, History of United
States Naval Operations in Works Mar I, Vclime
XIU, The Liberation of the Philippines, Luzon,
Mindanao, the Visayas, 1944-1945 (Boston: Little
Brown and Company, 1975), 59.

77. (F863) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G
“Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on.JN-37," 24
March 1945.

78. (S444) NSA, CCH Series KE Z, HH.
Carnpaigne, “.JN-97, Prospectus of Attack Cn,” OP-20-
G, 27 January 1944.

79. (TSS) NSA CCH X™ Z, “Statistics? Projects
Nesded: First Report of,” OP-20-G4A, 30 April 1945.

So. (TSL/SD NSA CCH Series XIT Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on .JN-37," 24
March 1945. (8/7/98 NSA CCH Series XH Z, OP-20-
Ga-A, “IN-7 Strength of Additives ‘om a Two-Deep,”
5 Seotember 1945. (£S446H) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Utilization of Available Climatological Daia for JN-37
Plein Text Estimates,” OP-20-G-4.4, .3-Jane 1945.
Crs/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“JN-37: Major
Computation Needed for Machiae “cighte.” OP-20-
G4-A, 3 May 1945.

81. GASH NSA CCH Series XH 7, J. A. Skinner,
“Proposal for Decoding Device,” OP-20-G, 16
February 1943. f[4o2e].

82. (8446R NSA CCH Series NTT ZL. R.
Stefnharct, “Additive Machines: Historical Summary
of,” 27 November 1944. (FRYSH OP-2u-9-4-A5, 23
Neverrber 1944, LR. Sterkarct, “Possible
Erziwesing Solutions for Full Selector Problems.”
(SST) NSA AHA ACC 26973. Fract ? Rowlett,
“Resort Ey the Subcommittee On ‘he Application of
Rapid Aralytical Machinery tothe Sclution of
Encivhered Code.” 3 November 1944 (&o46R
Steinhardt, L.R., “Copperhead 11{Project M-230)
Final Report,” 9 November 1944. SAS", NSA AHA
1408, Jobn N.Seaman, “Memersndum for Major
Edgerton, Ligison with Navy #5, Use of Par on Jap
Naval Problems of B I Type,” 9 June 7944.

Page 196

83. (SL458 NSA CCH Series XT Z, J. H. Howard,
“Summary of Conference onthe ‘37 Machine With
Bastman-Kodak and NCR Co.,” OP-20-G, 9 June 1945.

84. (FS4/St) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24
March 1945, part 1 Introduction, 8.

85. CES¢48T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24
March 1945.

86. (FS4S5 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24
March 1945, part I Introduction, 10.

87, ($4488 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“Summary of Conference onthe ‘137 Machine With
Eastman Kodak and NCR Co.,” OP-20-G, 9 June 1945.

88. ¢F674788 NSA CCH Series XH Z, D. L. Noble,
“Machine Weight Study for Proposed JN-37 Machine
Part 1,” OP-20-G-4-D, 19 July 1945, and NSA CCH
Series X11 Z, D. L. Noble, “Machine Weight Study for
Proposed JN-37 Machine Part II,” OP-20-G, 2 August
1945, give insights into how difficult it was to set and
maintain the photoelectric system sothat false hits
would be avoided and trve hits tagged.

co. CGS NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1952.

90. (TSH8F} NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“IN-c? Machine: Report of Conference at Eastman
Kedak Co. on 25 Mav 1945,” OP-20-G, 26 May 1945.

oO. (784467 NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley,
“Preparation of Weighting Film, Secondary Stage
Problem,” OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

92. (ESA'5F NSA CCH Series XH Z, R. A. Rowley,
“Preparction <f Weighting Film, Secondary Stage
Problem,” OP-20-G, 2 August 10.45.

03, CES48F NSA CCH XII Z, “Statistical Project
Needed: “inst Report of,” OP-20-G-4A, 30 April 1945.

91. (54/7) NSA CCF Series XII Z, “CP-20-G:
Anesis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37," 24
March 1045.

95. (ES/7S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z,LeRoy H.
Wheetley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, NSA CCH Series XII Z, List of Machines and
Targets, circa 1945. Actual run-times were not given
for “e?” dobs on Amber so an estimate had to be made
based upon a geaeral idea of the speed of the machine

FOP-GEGRETHCGHINTHREL-FOUSA-ANSCAN CBR AND NZEIAT
~“TOP-SECRETHESMINTHREL-FO-UGAe-AUG-GAN-GE-AND-NZLUNE

and the degree of parallel processing built into it. The
twenty-four-hour estimate was based on 800 compar-
isons per second and 100,000,000 tests. This estimate
of hours coincides with anofficial estiniate for a
round-robin of 1,000 500-letter messages for a gener-
al coincidence test.

96. €P377St) NSA CCH Series XT Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

97. 97751) NSA CCH Series XI Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.”

98. 66445D NSA CCH Series XIK, “JN-37
Machine Memoranda,” and “Some Uses of Amber in
Hagelin Attack,” December 1949.

99. CLS4S47 OP-20-G did give Eastman a signifi-
cant contract for new models of ICKY and HYPO after
the war. However, ittook many years for the new
models to be delivered.

100. {84/8R) NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, “M nutes
of RAM Meeting,” 19 February 1945.

101. 5478D NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, “Technical
Paper, RAM,” circa June 1945, 3, 5. The SIS censulted
with the navy about the new RAM ideas. €655-NSA
CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “SSA Proposal for 7omm
Film LC. Machine,” 8 June 1945.

102. G4¢5t) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, “Report Bythe Subcommittee On the
Application of Rapid Analytical Machinery to the
Solution of Enciphered Code,” 3 November 194.4.

103. (S448TJ Apparently, it was men such as Dale
Marston who took the lead as Leo Rosen seemed to
favor electronic versions ofthe special-purpose tab-
relay machines that IBM was building for the Agency.
67/3H) NSA CCH Series XI Z, Robert O. Ferner,
“Rapid Analytic Machinery Needed for Research,”
June 3,1943. Onthe RAM plans, 64465 NSA AHA
ACC 26372, SSA, “Rapid Analytical Machinery,” circa
October 1943. $4455 NSA AHA ACC 26373 Frank B.
Rowlett, “Two Copies of Report on Rapid Analytical
Machinery,” 3 November 1944.

104. (F877/S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 1945. (&4485- NSA AHA ACC
26373, Chief, “F? Branch, “RAM Equipment,” 29
March 1945.

105. (F581) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 19045, 4461) NSA AHA ACC
26373, SIS, “Technical Paper, RAM,” circa June 1945.

FOP-GEGRETIGOMHREL-FO-UGA AUS CAN- GER ANNETTE

(S/7/5R NSA CCH ACC 26373, “Twenty-Fourth-RAM
Report,” i May 1945.

106..{105¢48T) NSA CCH Series XH Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 1945, 7.

107. (84¢5t) NSA AHA ACC 20373, SIS Chief “°F”
Branch, “Request for RAM Equipment,” 23 March
1945, 7-

108. (S//SD NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief “F”
Branch, “Request for RAM Equipment,” 23 March
1945. (3-485 NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, “RAM in Future Cryptanalysis,” 3 May 1945.

109. 6S44SF) NSA CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G,
“SSA Proposal for 7omm Film I.C. Machine,” 8 June
1945, commented on the army’s request.

Page 197
“TOPSECRETHICOMINTHREL-TO-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIIG

75. (FS48Q After the war OP-20-G did order an
upgrade on ICKY, and Eastman reworked Amber and
Hypo. €68) NSA CCH Series XII 2Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.” But
there was much discontent with film and the mainte-
nance problems of the devices.

76. (U) Samuel Eliot Morison, History of United
States Naval Operations in World War I, Volume
XI, The Liberation ofthe Philippines, Luzon,
Mindanao, the Visayas, 1944-1945 (Boston: Little
Brown and Company, 1975), 59.

v7. (ESAS) NSA CCH Series XT Z, OP-20-G
“Analysis cf Analytical Machine Attack om dN-37,” 24
March 1945.

78. (P8444) NSA, CCH Series MID Z,H.H.
Campaigne, “JN-37, Prospectus of Aitack Cn,” OP-20-
G, 27 January 1944.

79. (TSS) NSA CCH X™1 Z, “Statistios! Projects
Neaded: First Report of,” OP-20-G4A, 30 April 1945.

80. (FSA) NSA CCH Series XI Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37," 24
March 1945. €F8+/5R NSA CCH Series XTI Z, OP-20-
Ga-A, “IN-~7 Strength of Additives “vom a Two-Deep,”
September 1945. (b84/6H) NSA CCH Series XH Z,
“Utilization cf Available Climatological Data for JN-37
Plein Text Estimates,” OP-20-G-4 4, <3-Jane 1945.
Che-78T) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“JN-37: Major
Computation Needed for Machine Wcighte.” OP-20-
G4-A, 3 May 1946.

21. @+458 NSA CCH Series XIE Z, J. A. Skinner,
“Proposal fer Decoding Device,” CP-20-G, 16
Febreary 1943. fl4022].

Re. (SL46R NSA CCH Series XTI ZL. R.
Steinharet, “Additive Machines: Historical Summary
of,” 27 November 1044. (F&AST) OP-2u-9-4-A5, 23
Noverrher 1944, LR. Steriharct. “Possible
Encuwering Solutions for Full Selector Problems.”
(S+°8T) NSA AHA ACC 263973, Frank P Rowlett,
“Resort Evthe Subcommittee On “he Application of
Rapid Analytical Machinery tothe Sclution of
Encivbered Code,” 3 November 1944 (+ /5H
Stemhardt, L.R., “Copperhead 11 {Project M-230)
Final Report,” 9 November 1944. GAS NSA AHA
1575, John N. Seaman, “Memcrdum for Major
Edgerton, Lieison with Navy #3, Use of Tam on Jap
Naval Problems of B I Type.” 9 dune “ob.

Page 196

83. (S445 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“Summary of Conference onthe ‘37° Machine With
Eastman-Kodak and NCR Co.,” OP-20-G, 9 June 1945.

84. CFS47S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24
March 15.45, part I Introduction, 8.

85. (LS+/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37,” 24
March 1945.

86. (F844S8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G:
Analysis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37," 24
March 1945, part I Introduction, 10.

87. (64455 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“Summary of Conference onthe ‘137° Machine With
Eastman Kodak and NCR Co.,” OP-20-G, 9 June 1945.

88. CFS4/84 NSA CCH Series XII Z, D. L. Noble,
“Machine Weight Study for Proposed JN-37 Machine
Part 1,” OP-20-G-4-D, +9 July 1945, and NSA CCH
Series XT1 Z, D. L. Noble, “Machine Weight Study for
Proposed JN-37 Machine Part II,” OP-20-G, 2 August
1945, give insights into how difficult it was to set and
maintain the photoelectric system sothat false hits
would be avoided and trve hits tagged.

260, EESAAGE NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953.

90. (TS4487 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“JIN-c7 Machine: Report of Conference at Eastman
Kodak Co. on 25 May 1945,” OP-20-G, 26 May 1945.

91. CESA46R NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley,
“Preparation of Weighting Film, Secondary Stage
Problem,” OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

02. (LS4/SB-NSA CCH Series XII Z, R. A. Rowley,
“Preparetion <fWeighting Film, Secondary Stage
Problem,” OP-20-G, 2 August 1945.

03, CFS4485 NSA CCH XU Z, “Statistical Project
Needed: First Report of,” OP-20-G-4A, 30 April 1945.

94. CESPT! NSA CCE Series XII Z,“OP-20-G:
Anehsis of Analytical Machine Attack on JN-37," 24
March 1045.

95. (T8/7ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheetley, “Crvptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, NS4 CCH Series XII Z, List of Machines and
Targets, circa 1945. Actual run-times were not given
for “e7" iobs on Amber so an estimate had tobe made
based upon ageaeral idea of the speed of the machine

-FOP-GEGRETICOMINTHREL-TOUSA- AUS, CAN, GERAND NZCIRT
—TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL T6-UGA-ALE-CAN-CE RAND NEI.

and the degree of parallel processing built into it. The
twenty-four-hour estimate was based on 800 compar-
isons per second and 100,000,000 tests. This estimate
ofhours coincides with an official estimate for a
round-robin of 1,000 500-letter messages for a gener-
al coincidence test.

06. €PS/738t) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

97. S481) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.”

98. 4644S NSA CCH Series XIK, ‘“JN-37
Machine Memoranda,” and “Some Uses of Amber in
Hagelin Attack,” December 1949.

99. CSS? OP-20-G did give Eastman a signifi-
cant contract for new models of ICKY and HYPO after
the war. However, ittook many years for the new
models to be delivered.

100. {8467 NSA AHA ACC 26373, SIS, “M nutes
of RAM Meeting,” 19 February 1945.

101. 457/781) NSA AHA ACC 26973, SIS, “Technical
Paper, RAM,” circa June 1945, 3, 5. The SIS consulted
with the navy about the new RAM ideas. 454455-NSA
CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “SSA Proposal for 7omm
Film LC. Machine,” 8 June 1945.

102. 634464) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, “Report Bythe Subcommittee On the
Application of Rapid Analytical Machinery tothe
Solution of Enciphered Code,” 3 November 1944.

103. S¢A8T7 Apparently, it was men such as Dale
Marston who took the lead as Leo Rosen seemed to
favor electronic versions of the special-purpose tab-
relay machines that IBM was building for the Agency.
//3D NSA CCH Series XII Z, Robert O. Ferner,
“Rapid Analytic Machinery Needed for Research,”
June 3,1943. Onthe RAM plans, G4SB NSA AHA
ACC 26372, SSA, “Rapid Analytical Machinery,” circa
October 1943. 445B NSA AHA ACC 26373 Frank B.
Rowlett, “Two Copies of Report on Rapid Analytical
Machinery,” 3 November 1944.

104. (£57731) NSA CCH Series XH Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 1945. (S44SB-NSA AHA ACC
26373, Chief, “F” Branch, “RAM Equipment,” 29
March 1945.

105. (FSA4SD) NSA CCH Series XI Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 1945, 44$1) NSA AHA ACC
26373, SIS, “Technical Paper, RAM,” circa June 1945.

FOP-GEGRETHGOMINTHREL-FO-USAAUS-CAN-GBROANE- NZDT

+8745 NSA CCH ACC 26373, “T'wenty-Fourth-RAM
Report,” i May 1945.

106. £2581) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Status
of RAM,” circa June 1945, 7.

107. (84464) NSA AHA ACC 20373, SIS Chief “F”
Branch, “Request for RAM Equipment,” 23 March
1945, 7-

108. (8//SD NSA AHA ACC 29373, SIS Chief “F”
Branch, “Request for RAM Equipment,” 23 March
1945. (S448 NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B.
Rowlett, “RAM in Future Cryptanalysis,” 3 May 1945.

109. 4°55 NSA CCH Series XII 2, OP-20-G,
“SSA Proposal for 7omm Film I.C. Machine,” 8 June
1945, commented on the army’s request.

Page 197
This page intentionally left blank

Page 198
“TOPSECRETICOMINTAREL TO USA, AUS, CAIG COR AIL RZC/AT

Chapter 7

(U} The Magic Continues

(U) Would History Repeat Itself?

(U) Hindsight might lead one to think it
would have been easy to predict the future of the
United States and its signals intelligence services
after World War II. The Cold War and ics conse-
quences for America’s military, industrial, and
academic life seem “natural.” The rise of Big
Science, the development of a new type of tiniver-
sity, and the growth ofa massive intelligence
establishment intertwined with public and pri-
vate high technology institutions appear histori-
cally inescapable. Ever the close relationship
among Western nations, as reflected by the for-
mation of NATO, and the exceptional cooperation
between the intelligence agencies of Britain and
the United States appear to have been fcreor-
dained.

(U) But in 1945 all ofthat was inthe future,
and much of it came asa surprise to the nation
and to the leaders of the American comrrunica-
tions intelligence community. For ccontempo-
raries, the future was uncertain. No one imagined
that America was going to build a multibillion-
dollar intelligence bureaucracy that seemed to
have alife ofits own. In fact, for those inthe

cryptanalytic organizations inearly 1945, there |

were signs they might return tothe isolated and
have-not world ofthe 1930s, anera when
American politicians condemned “reading other
gentlemen’s mail.” The concerns about SIGINT’s
future had some foundation. Communications
from the White House were less than subtle
reminders that even the Soviets’ communications
should be treated as sacred.

(F845) None of the codebreakers wanted a
reversion to the attitudes and inadequate budgets
of the 1930s, but a few thought that some degree

TORSECRETICOMING/ Ri TOUS A-AUS.-CAN-GBR—AME-MZ Le

 

tle

 

ofisolationisra might be useful. They reasoned
that eway to eecp monies flowing to SIGINT
would be to ena World War Ii’s dependency on
Great Britain. A nandful of influential men ir the
intelligence comaunity suggested that the ties to
Britain’s cr/planalytic organizations be cut. Wi

America’s policymakers having to depend only on
“G” and the SiS, they reasoned, there would bea
decreased chance oftheir allocations being
slashed.’

€F378H) Those beliefs were significant and
contributed tothe rejection ofone ofthe most
generous cffers Britain ever made to the United
States. The British had come to consider their
attack on te Fish systems as their great cryptan-
alytic achievement. They saw it as their intellectu-
aland, because of Colossus, their technological
triumph. ‘Tivey also viewed Fish as an example of
the cryptanalyiic systems of the future. They fore-
saw the day when most systems would rely upon
baudot-teletype, sot Morse transmissions.

(FSA4-5 When they offered the United States
one of their Colossus machines in the summer of
1945, and mere than hinted it would be followed
bythe cryptosecrets itrequired, they were
shocked toleern their offer was rejected. They
found it difficult to understand why and so did
some Americans. Joseph Wenger wanted a
Colossus in the United States, but the head of the
technical arm of the SIS, Frank Rowlett, thought
it unwise tu accept a machine that was so complex
and so expensive to maintain. * Combined with
the desire for autonomy, Rowlett’s objections
were convincing.

(U) The rejection did not mean that American

SIGINT planners were sure of their technological
future. Men like Joseph Wenger had good reason

Page 199
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL TO USA, AUS CAN-GBIC AND NZLIXT

to fear the consequences of peace. World War II
had not yielded permanent solutions to most of
the problems that had frustrated him and Bush
during the 1930s. The goal of creating a perma-
nent intelligence-gathering capability had not
been achieved and, certainly, the grand institu-
tional dreams of Admiral Hooper had not been
fulfilled.

(U) And asthe war was ending, the achieve-
ments that had been made inthe previous four
years were threatened. It appeared that OP-20-G
and the SIS would have to struggle to improve if
not just maintain their powers. And they would
have to do it alone. America seemed to be return-
ing to a prewar institutional profile. The corpora-
tions, the universities, and the military were
pulling apart.

(U) Big Science seemed about tobe torn
down. Vannevar Bush’s NDRC had been a gener-
ous but only temporary big brother for the mili-
tary and the aspiring research universities. In
1945, when NDRC funds were being cut off, no
one was sure that academics wanted to or could
continue to supply intellectual and technical solu-
tions to the military.

(U) Agreater cause for worry was the indica-
tions that the unity of purpose among the large
corporations and the government was about to
end. The relationship that had developed during
the war seemed tobe too costly to maintain.
Industry’s desire to return to high-profit work
appeared to be impossible to overcome. No mili-
tary agency could guarantee the high and consis-
tent rates of return needed to persuade major cor-
porations tocontinue todevote themselves to
responding to military needs.

(£8) In addition, the private sector gave few
indications that it would support expensive long-
term investigations and developmental work that
might compensate for the termination ofthe
wartime research programs. Many promising
technologies that had appeared during the boun-

Page 200

ty years ofthe war stood indanger of being
ignored as military budgets declined. It seemed
unlikely, for example, that universities would
continue the type of research into radio wave
propagation that had proven so useful to OP-20-
G’s interception program. There also seemed lit-
tle hope that corporate programs would lead to
the advanced demultiplexing equipment that the
army and navy so desperately needed to tap into
the modern transmission systems oftheir tar-
gets.3

(U) The prediction of the future of the federal
scientific establishment was not comforting. The
best forecast seemed one ofa return to the lean
1930s. Aweak National Bureau of Standards, a
small navy Office of Research and Inventions in
competition with afeeble ONR, and an army
communications research program confined toa
hungry Signal Corps might be all that the com-
munications/intelligence agencies could look for-
ward to.

(U) During the last months ofthe war, the
gloomy predictions seemed tobe coming true.
Although the post-World War II situation would
be infinitely better than during the 1920s, the
army and navy cryptanalytic agencies would not
have the partners, the resources, nor the autono-
my they had during the preceding four years. It
was not easy for them to continue to be techno-
logically innovative, and, although they had a few
more years of cryptanalytic “magic,” they soon
found it nearly impossible to meet the challenges
of their most important cryptologic adversaries.

(VU) What There Wasn't

(U) Like the story of OP-20-G and the SIS
during the 1930s, the history of computers, auto-
mated cryptanalysis, and data processing in the
SIGINT agencies between 1945 and the mid-
1950s can be understood only inthe context of
what was not available to America’s codebreak-
ers. What wasn’t there extends tomuch more
than hardware. The institutional structure need-
edfor adynamic response to technologically
sophisticated mathematical/cryptanalytic con-
frontations did not exist. Asimportant, World
War IIhad not led toany great cryptanalytic
methods revolutions. Although there had been
much effort, mathematical cryptanalysis was
something that still had to be created.

(U) There isa long list of other particulars.
Chief among the “missing” were the modern com-
puter and an industry willing to provide the spe-
cial types of devices required for codebreaking
and traffic analysis.4 In 1945 the modern elec-
tronic digital computer was still awish whose
outlines were just being drawn. There were no
commercial firms that were investing large
amounts inits development, and academia,
though willing, showed little sign of being able to
carry the financial burden of bringing the univer-
sal computer to life.

(U) And many of those who saw the new elec-
tronic computer slowly emerging from university
and corporate centers had very serious questions
if that “serial” machine could ever have the power
needed toconquer cryptanalytic enemies. The
critics of the emerging general-purpose computer
desired machines with more complex architec-
ture, ones that relied upon multiple processors
and parallel action. Such machines seemed
unlikely to appear on their own, however. There
were no indications that any outside group would
even attempt to bring such alternative architec-
ture to life without direct and massive support
from the codebreaking community.® Worse, few
companies seemed willing to take the money OP-
20-G and the SIS did have to spend on automa-
tion. Both agencies experienced great difficulty
before the 1950s in finding responsible contrac-
tors who would commit to building the latest gen-
eration of special-purpose electronic devices.

(U) Intellectual resources were also absent.
The in-house mathematical groups that the two
agencies had created had to be vastly reduced in
size at the close of the war. There was no ready-

FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL TO-UGi-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZEET

made substitute. The American universities had
not yet reestablished ways to link themselves to
secret military projects, and the armed services
and their major contractors had yet to invent the
“think tank.” The Rand Corporation, with its abil-
ity toallow academics to change into strategic
planners, remained only a thought in the mind of
the most aggressive air force generals.

(U) Institutional power was declining.
Neither OP-20-G nor the SIS was sure that it
could maintain the degree of autonomy granted
to it during the war. The “G” section and the “F”
group stood under the threat of losing their free-
dom to design machines and to select who was to
build them.

(U) Despite an immediate postwar generosity
that extended the life of some programs, there
were indications in early 1945 that signals intelli-
gence might have to remain passive, only waiting
onthe sidelines while, hopefully, someone else
made the great technological leaps needed to
match advances in code and cipher making.

(VU) Signs of Some Appreciation

(U) However, during 1945 there was some
encouraging news. The SIS’s and OP-20-G’s
wartime achievements had made them a few very
good and very influential friends in the military.
From the most important generals and admirals
came words of praise for Ultra. With a little con-
vincing by advocates such as Joseph Wenger, that
praise was turned into promises by America’s
leaders to provide atleast some of the resources
needed to maintain and, perhaps, improve com-
munications intelligence capabilities.

(U) Although budgets were slashed and work
forces seriously reduced, the SIS and OP-20-G
were granted more than should have been expect-
ed given their treatment inthe 1930s. The fifty-
percent reduction inthe amount of IBM equip-
ment in 1946, for example, still left the agencies

Page 201
FOR-SECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSA AUS CAN GRR AND NZLIIX1

with 300 machines. That was tens of times more
than what was on hand at the start of the war.®

(FS77S1) The SIS was allowed a staff of 1,500,
and “G” retained some 700 people ~ infinitely
greater numbers than had been allocated to the
services during the 1920s and 1930s. That gave
some hope that although the United States had
not yet decided to take responsibility for policing
the entire world, a signals shutdown was unlike-
ly.’

(U) Significant for the history of computers
and cryptanalysis were the numbers of “techni-
cal” slots allocated to each agency. Both had
approximately five percent of their staff approved
to work on advanced technological and scientific
matters. Those ratios were maintained during the
postwar period, with the navy gaining a slight but
important edge over the army in the numbers of
high tech employees.* The technical sections
were not large enough to support huge in-house
production capabilities, but they were capable of
pursuing some research and creating smaller
machines.

(U) More than numbers of people indicated
the value military leaders placed on centralized
SIGINT. Although nofirm promises could be
made in 1945, hints were dropped that none of
the cryptotechnologies would be abandoned.
Whether the favored technology was the IBM tab-
ulator-relay combinations or the electromechani-
cal components in Madame X,they would be
given a chance to develop into more powerful ver-
sions of what had emerged during the war.

(U) The most tantalizing hin: concerned the
possibility ofan aggressive new Rapid Machine
program. During late 1944 and 1945 the army and
navy engineers were allowed to draw up some rel-
atively long-term plans for very advanced
machines. Different groups had their favored
approaches. Many in the agencies wanted to con-
centrate on extending the reach of the workhorse
tabulating equipment. Others sought continuity

Page 202

through extending the reach ofthe Bush
Comparator. A few continued to have faith in the
type ofanalog and microfilm devices that had
been built at Eastman-Kodak. Ofcourse, there
were vocal advocates for turning digital electron-
ics into operational machines.

#8) There was aconsensus onthe role of
SIGINT in developing all the technologies: “G”’
and the SIS should play an active part in bringing
to life any new hardware. That was almost
inescapable. There was much to be done and few
on the outside willing to do it. There was no gen-
eral-purpose electronic device that was a great
advance over Bush’s old Comparator, and even
the mundane, such as input and output technolo-
gy, remained at the early levels.?

(U) More MAGIC: Cryptanalysis Continues
as Before

(P877SH The chance to finally build analytic
machines that would put America ahead of the
technology of encryption seemed favorable dur-
ing the first postwar years. One reason for that
was America’s continued cryptanalytic successes.
The machines it had in hand were providing intel-
ligence. In several instances “G” and “F” had to
hurry to finish new machines, but, in general, the
agencies did not have to concentrate, as during
the war, on emergencies. For three years after the
end of World War II, there was every indication
that the kind of triumphs that had been achieved
during the early 1940s would continue. As impor-
tant, even the most dangerous ofthe nation’s
adversaries had decided to refrain from creating
military crises. Success gave the agencies time to
look ahead.

(E8S+/5_H The impressive work ofthe
American SIGINT agencies continued on after
the Japanese surrender; remarkably, it even
seemed to be improving. Every type of code and
cipher used by every important nation was or
seemed about to be conquered. Despite the intro-
duction ofmore sophisticated methods and
 

i F_frachine proved stubborn,
‘ ¢ there was hope that a persistent search using tra-

“TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL TO USA AUS;CAN- GBR-AND-NZEEE

machines, some 70 percent of the systems of the
minor nations were “readable” in 1946 and 1947,
and over half of those of the three new major tar-
gets were, toa significant degree, open to the
United States. *°

8/45 With help from the British, some of
the most critical and well defended of the Soviet
codes and ciphers were yielding information.
There was every reason to believe that what had
been accomplished against the Germans and
Japanese would be repeated against Russia and
its allies. Progress seemed inescapable. By 1947,
for example, engineers at the army and navy cen-
ters could build relay analogs ofsome ofthe
important Russian cipher devices, just as they
had built analogs after Japan’s Purple machine
had been penetrated.”

CES#/8S1) The systems being entered were
important. It appeared that, asin World War II,
America would be able to gain critical intelligence
through the interception and analysis ofa rela-
tively small number of messages, ones which
would reveal the strategic thinking of the political
and military leaders of Russia and its client
states.‘* During the first postwar years, old

attacks and machines were doing quite well. More.”

than operator errors and busts were leading the
Americans and British into the Soviet additive

complex codes and ciphers. Other possible
sources of information, including traffic analysis,
were left to older machines and methods.

S745 Something besides that cryptovision
shaped the initial postwar plans. It was thought
that, unlike the years of the Atlantic U-boat crisis,
no massive and emergency machine construction
program would be needed. “4

(U) A Cryptanalytic Future: Architecture
and Ambiguity and Budgets

(U) Everyone saw the future of “G” and the
SIS as centered onthe traditional cryptanalytic
function. Traffic analysis, direction finding, and
analysis of enemy clear text might play roles but
very small ones. But all was neither secure nor
settled, especially in1945 when plans for both
immediate and long-term machine development
were being created. Although there was an agree-
ment about general target priorities for the
immediate postwar era, the exact nature of the
cryptosystems and machines that might be con-
fronted was not predictable.*

CFS++SI) Some trends were evident, however.

 

 

 

| His company’s products would proba-

 

codes,

 

ditional tools would. uncover its wiring and its
indicator system.

(SH/8B° That image ofa consistent SIGINT
future shaped the nature of the immediate post-
war machine development programs at the

_-army’s and the navy’s Washington headquarters.

EO 3.3(h)(2
P.L. 86-36

Both agencies sought cryptanalytic, not “data,”
machines. The goal in the first postwar years was
to create new generations of machines to break

)

bly be used by every nation. The second trend was
towards the adoption of on-line machines. Many
nations were adopting the type of baudot-
teleprinter and multiplexed systems that had
formed the backbone ofthe German Fish net-
works.

(¥377Sp In addition, there were at least con-
cerns that Enigma-like wired rotor machines
might reappear, and it seemed likely that super-
enciphered code systems would not vanish with
the fall of Japan.The formidable one-time pad
systems that seemed unbreakable when correctly
used were known to be a favorite of many diplo-
matic corps.

Page 203

 
EO.3.3(h)(2)

   
   
   
   
  
   
  
   

esHeH But notiting. about target systems,
ith one exception, was so certain, nor the devel-
pment of the. underlying technoldgy for analytic
achines. so predictable, that a rush tocreate a
ost of new special-purpose devices was justified

igh-tech single-purpose, single-system mach-
‘ines, except for, some of those manufactured by

 

 

 

1. could
: be dealt with through existing relay, even tabula-
: tor equipment, as could many ofthe remaining
additive systems, such: ‘as those used: by Soviet
[ agencies. Not enough was
iown in 1945 about:the. new teletype-baudot
_ devices to warrant the construction of expensive
: special- purpose contrivances.’ As well, since the

 

_ promises of the discovery of effective pure math- ™.

_ ematical methods had yet to be fulfilled, launch-
ing into an expensive search’for ; anew “calcula-
tion” machine seemed unjustified. —

  
 

) Only one type of machine, anew
___|deserved special technological attention
at the: end of the war. Itwas_ the’
series. The Americans knew it was going: to be
used for high-level systems by many important
nations; they had enough knowledge of its inner
workings to challenge it; and they were confident
they could pick the correct attacks.” Asa result},

 

although many new machines weuld be built, the *

only adventurous special-purpose RAM planned
for aspecific problem atthe end of the war was
forthd_|*

 

(UV) The Enigma Is Dead (We Think): Long
Live the

 

 

 

 

FFS4/S1) The first step towards anew
machine program at “G” and the SIS was to sort
out what WWIL machines should be abandoned.
All but ascore ofthe navy Bombes were
destroyed, and the million dollar Madame X was
taken apart. The Duennas, the other elaborate

Page 204

n 1945." There was-no reason to build a series of 4

~FOP-GECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USK-AUS, CAN, OBI AND NZETAT

Bombes, and the electronic Scritcher were kept,
however.” It was thought they could be used
against other rotor machines or the few Enigmas
that might bebrought back into use. All the
devices that had been effective against the

were retained. They were
refurbished and readied to attack diplomatic,
civil, and military traffic from around the world.”°

 

 

 

 

<F5//5B- The Bombes |E

analogs were useless against

 

 

 
 

 

(IS#/8H The investment needed to conquer”

the more] } seemed
reasonable. And success would provide invalu-

able returns. For example, with Germany and__-~

Japan defeated, stripped oftheir_colonies,

 

 

CTS/7SD The potential rewards fro invest
ing inattacks against other” nations’ Hagelins
were even greater. _” Was “the” manufactur-
er of cryptodevices, and every nation, business,
and bank in any part’ of the world had to rely upon
his products. From South America to.Northern
Europe to Arabia, if automated encryption was
being intercepted, it was ‘probably the product of
a ” There was: ‘one other very important
aspect of the ; ‘one that helped
launch the American cryptanalytic attacks against
it. he could be purchased on
the open market and their inner workings closely
studied.

 

   

 

 

 

 

(U) A Hangover from Another Time

€F54/85 One of the first postwar

RAMs had a strange beginning. It dated to when
the navy still thought it would have to launch a
bloody invasion against Japan.** “G’s” mathe-
maticians needed a large and fast digraph count-
ing machine to attack various Japanese systems.
The device had to be much more powerful than
the creaky Mike. Although it would be expensive
to build, “G” approved a request for the “counter.”
But the machine was almost canceled when
Japan surrendered. Fortunately, the mathemati-
cians were able toconvince Engstrom and
Wenger to continue the project. They agreed that
despite the about-to-appear second Freak at
Arlington Hall, the navy needed a universal

—~FOP-CEGRETIGOMINFIREL-T6-U6A AUE-GAN-GER-AND-NZEE—

_- EO 3.3(h\(2)
“PLL. 86-36

counting device for its postwar missions. It would

help, they realized, inthe initial mathematical
studies of unbroken systems and machines. *8

eSHSD With promises of financing in hand,

machine designers’ were consulted about techno-
logical options. Itwas decided that the original
~ proposal to build a machine to handle an alpha-
e bet greater than sixty-four characters was
~ impractical. Also quickly rejected was the idea of

basing the counting machine ona _film-analog

ombination as had been recommended earlier.

CSSD The “G’NCML team explored other
possible te¢éhnologies and then made a surprising
decision. Although “G” was filled with advocates
of electronics, its engineers decided tolet the
army’s Freak carry the risks of building an “elec-
tronic” counter. Whether condensers or tubes
were used, said the NCML crew, too many of
them, would be needed for auseful digraph
machine. With asixty-four by sixty-four matrix
and’the counters required to handle upto 999,
the number ofcomponents, they concluded,
would be too great. There would have to be more
than 3,997 counters, each needing three posi-
tions. Temperamental electric or electronic parts

smeant too many errors and too much “down
; time.”
’ reliable electromechanical counters were the only

For the navy’s engineers, old-fashioned
viable alternative.

€657/SH They were close to gaining the final
approval of the cryptanalysts; then someone cal-
culated the speed of the machine if it used the off-
the-shelf industrial counters. The device would be
incredibly slow, as sluggish as the old frustrating
Mike. There was astandoff. The codebreakers
wanted a fast machine, but the engineers would
not accept the responsibility ofan electronic
device. After much wrangling, they arrived ata
compromise. The engineers decided they would
take the responsibility of designing custom-made
mechanical counters that were fast enough to
please the cryptanalysts.

Page 205
“TOP 'SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUS;CAN-GBR-AND-NZE-

E8#/8DP After outlining the new counters, the
engineers sought acontractor. Unfortunately,
“G’s” two largest World War II contractors, NCR
and IBM, did not want to take the project. “G”
had nowhere to go, and the machine was put on
hold during much of 1945 and 1946.

Ce8+745%) “G” waited until its “captive corpora-
tion,” Engineering Research Associates, was
formed before it put any more effort into the
counter-project. But once ERA agreed to take the
contract, “G” was sure it would soon have a useful
and reliable machine.That was arather naive
assumption, however.

CESH4S®) What became known as Alcatraz did
not appear until 1950, had about half the power
originally planned, and was much more expen-
sive than expected. Once in operation, it threw
technological tantrums. It had problems with its
large printer, and the expense of maintaining the
machine led to Alcatraz’s very early retirement in

1954.74

 

© Alcatraz
(WU) Mrs. OMalley’s Wayward Son

(S445) Another of the special devices OP-20-
G thought it had to have in order to deal with its
postwar targets became, arguably, the largest

Page 206

 

EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L. 86-36

electronic imitation of an adding machine ever
built. Filling half aroom with vacuum tubes,
relays, aspecial card reader constructed by the
IBM spin-off Commercial Controls, and a tabula-
tor’s printer, O’Malley was one of postwar “G's”
earliest and most challenging projects.

(S4/SB Something like O’Malley had. been
desired since 1942, but it was the growing backlog
of messages [__ ] and
some technological advances that sparked its
final design in 1947. O’Malley was the cryptana-
lysts’ special and very grand version of what IBM
had introduced at the end of 1946, an electronic
multiplying machine. O’Malley had to be special
and had to go beyond IBM’s offering because it
was to accomplish what Bush and Wenger had
agreed was not achievable inthe mid-1930s, the
automation of the advanced version of an IC test,
Chi.

 

(S/7SH The cryptanalysts’ “Chi” was avery
close relative of the Chi Square test. Chi Square is
anow familiar statistical
method for determining if
two distributions came
from the same “universe.”
It seems commonplace and
unsophisticated today, but
inthe 1940s, especially
because ofthe tedious cal-
culations itneeded, Chi
seemed very advanced. It
was one of the most sophis-
_ticated ways to identify
cipher alphabets produced
by the same key.*>

pe lahiaiailaiee

48/58 As it was used in
cryptanalysis, “Chi” was
computationally demand-
ing. The frequencies of each letter in one cipher
text had to be multiplied against the correspon-
ding frequencies in another text: then the prod-
ucts had to be summed and used in the algorithm
which determined whether or not the sum was
EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L. 86-36

likely to have been produced by chance. To isolate
probable “same key” messages called for testing
each text against all the others. That meant thou-
sands of multiplications;.. hundreds of additions,
and dozens of evaluations. for the simplest
attacks. . ci

8//SB The manpower-starved “G” realized
that ifthe World War II victories against
devices were to be continued, ithad to have an
ultra-powerful machine for accumulating the fre-
quencies, calculating the sums of-cross-products,
identifying the “significant” sums, and displaying
the results. Given the exploding workload of
those charged with keeping up with the
generated traffic, it was decided that an electron-
ichigh-speed multiplier was worthy ofan enor-
mous financial investment.

(S//5B- The new navy contractor,
Engineering Research Associates (ERA),
was asked to build a super-fast machine
that could recognize individual letters,
tally them, and then perform all the thou-
sands of multiplication and summations
needed to identify those cipher messages
whose letter frequencies “correlated.”
And it was asked to produce it quickly.

(S77SH That was ademanding
request inthe technological context of
1947. ERA was expected to produce a
machine more powerful than what had
been developed bythe world’s largest
and most advanced computing machine
company: the IBM 603 electronic calcu-
lator, which had been introduced in late
1946.7’

(64/8) Within ayear and one-half,
the men in St. Paul were able to build an
electronic “calculator” several orders
more complex than the IBM device; but
the need to shift attention to the produc-
tion of another machine, one for critical
SIGINT fire fighting, led to O’Malley

being far below original expectations. To save
design and production time, O'Malley became a
“get the job done” machine. It was stripped of
many ofits intended powers so that it could be
out into operation as soon as possible.

t87#/SH Many ofthe interesting technical
challenges in O’Malley’s original specifications
were avoided. First, it was decided that, as in the
1930s, recognizing and tallying letters were
chores best done by older methods and technolo-
gies. Separate machines would prepare the letter
frequency counts. O’Malley was deprived of even
more functions. It did not include the circuitry
needed for an automatic test for the significance
ofthe results. All the summed cross products
were printed, leaving the analysts with the need
to do much hand calculation. And O’Malley even

 

¥
t
t
i
5
}
|
;
;

 

Page 207
E | 3.3(h)(2)
“g

  

J needed help reading its input. Given the available
Yo technology, special machine had to be con-
‘structed ‘to purtch tallies into IBM cards ina spe-

Gial format’and the. standard IBM readers had to

be. reconfigured, . .

HSB Without that -jary-rigged equipment
and its’ special dual teletype, tape” “readers,
O'Malley ° ‘would. have taken more: years to’ con-

struct. “G”’ ‘could not wait;-for example, for mag=...

netic drums. that eould have provided’ ‘a high-
speed means ‘of presenting two. streams of data.

The quick fixes ‘to the old: card and. tape technolo-.

gies had to be aceepted. -

87/55 O'Malley became ‘part of the tradition
of the relay box and tabulator combinations of the
NC Machines of World. War IL. Like them and'the

new IBM 603, it was a special-purpose (although.

electronic) calculation box inserted between tab-
ulator-teletype input‘and output equipment. The
inside of the machine also reflected the time pres-
sures under which it was constructed. It certainly
did not break any new logical.ground; it was a
direct imitation ofa decimal-based electro-
mechanical calculating machine. It multiplied by
following the traditional methods of repeated

additions.

(S481) Such conservatism did not mean that
O’Malley was a minor accomplishment, however.
Commercial firms, such as IBM). Remington-
Rand, and UNIVAC, based their early electronic
offerings onthe same philosophy of following
known architecture and logic. Ring-counter, dec-
imal machines were the norm. Binary devices

were the challenging exceptions that were very,

slow to ) appear on the market or even in the labo-
ratory.?* :

(S#/SB And for its time, O'Malley did its ‘cal-
culations quite rapidly. It was able to form and
sum as many as thirty-five cross products in one
and one-third seconds. It could have done its.
work much faster, but it was limited by its lack of
memory and its very slow printer.

Page 208

FOP SECRETHCOMINTHREE-TO-USA_AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NEL

(S$#48B O'Malley proved useful for more than
its original limited operational job. When
O’Malley was asked to serve the needs of research
mathematicians, its tubes and relays were per-
suaded to pretend they could, for example, invert
matrices. *?

(87//5B But all in all, economy and a need to
obtain the final equipment as soon as possible
meant that O'Malley was acompromise that had

*~a short life. Perhaps it was its recurring I/O prob-

lenis.that led to O’Malley’s untimely and perhaps
embarrassing end. It was allowed a relatively

*s peaceful retirement twenty months after its birth.

 

 

Machine

 

(S/8 The Grand

 

(TS44S..0’Malley and Alcatraz were not the
heart ofthe ‘planned postwar attack onthe

Te fmecines: A very special device had been
ér consideration... well before Germany’s

defeat. But the central:
Hecate, had to wait until “G” formed its captive
corporation, ERA.

(484458 Hecate was more than two years in

*. the making, arriving in Washington in 1948. Built
*.with the help of the ex-OP-20-G engineers, such

as John Howard, Hecate was acombination of
the. old and new.

(E8484) But even borrowing from the past
did not make Hecate easy to complete. It was a
huge and expensive combination whose cost esti-
mate of $80,000 became adelivery price of
almost $250,000.*° Its price tag, the cost of five
World War II Bombes, was justified by results,

‘. however. It and its sister produced a constant

 

1 Z ] for more than a
decade.** Hecate was;-in fact, one of the electron-
ic marvels of its time. ©

€FS7/SH Hecate contained some true

__ advances, such as its four high-s eed electronic
. “rings” that imitated a in the
hey ran ata very respectable 200 KC

 
(U) Hecate

(100,000 trials a second). And Hecate’s scritcher-
type capability ofeliminating branch searches
speeded processing enormously. **

€£8778D To save construction time, electron-
ics were employed only where demands for speed
presented no alternative. Hecate might have been
even more innovative, but it was called out of the
workshop for immediate operational needs. Most
of the machine was composed of the familiar and
reliable plugboards and relays, and its essential
logic was based upon familiar cryptanalytic-engi-
neering approaches.

5/464) Hecate was not a digital computer
and did not calculate. Itwas ananalog “crib”
machine with some “digital” components. Like
the Grenades, it used a short ten- or twelve-letter
stretch of suspected plain text to identify “starting
points.” And itwas not acomplete processor.

Much independent statistical analysis of a system
was needed before Hecate could find the initial
settings for atransmission. And its power was
limited_to just |

 

(P84/SH-To use Hecate the cribs were set with
dials; then a message was read, letter by letter,
into Hecate’s relay memory through a standard
tape reader. ‘When the relay memory had the
required number ofletters init, the electronic
rings were run:through their positions until the
parallel flows ofelectricity through the plug-
boards and relay circuits signaled that all the crib-
plain pairs and ring positions were consistent, or
that all the wheel positions had been tested. At a
hit, the machine stopped and dials indicated the
position of the “rings” and the-place of the crib in
the message. The dials were’used because there

_7OP-SEORETICQMINTIREL-70-UaA-AuG-oant-eon-ant rete P -L. 86-36 page 209

EO 3.3(h)(2)

 
was still no printer that was fast and reliable
enough to compete with hand notation.

“€F8//SB- Each of Hecate’s offset letter tests
took approximately three seconds, excluding the
time an operator needed to write down the hit
positions. It took a total of approximately twenty
minutes to run a 500-letter message. *4

CGSH8D Hecate was reliable and effective,
but, like the Bombes, she had some serious defi-
ciencies. Because of the nature of her test, circuit
completion, Hecate could produce too many pos-
sible answers. Each had to be examined by a lim-
ited workforce. To reduce the list of possibilities
required difficult-to-find, very precise, and error-
free cribs. Worse, Hecate could be used_again-

P.L. 86-36
EO’3.3(h)(2)

 

 

 

 

S/S Hecate’s limitations were recognized
while it was under construction, but the machine
was needed so badly that it could not be aban-
doned nor radically altered. "

 

S}/5B-OP-20-G had nosolution for the

 

 

stonly

 

of intelligence. The go-ahead was given for the
development of another special-purpose device,
* Warlock.

 

 

 

a AT
snspe Bt) |

 

E

Page 210

     
    
 
 

Cre ss 4)

ah
4

=<
ets Domed
«
.
————
a 4 |

oOx gti)
, a 7 rE

LE

¢t-
oo Meese
8
£

 

oa) ee ee eee Le a a ee

Warlock I

 
FOP-QECRETHCOMINTHREL-FO-USie-AUG--Git-CE RAND ZL

(U) Hecate’s Impressive Competitor

CESS) Warlock was much more adventur-
ous and costly than Hecate, so much so that it
took some four years to design and manufactur-
er.*4 It was physically big as well as expensive. It
was so large that it had to be kept at the ERA fac-
tory in Minnesota. Warlock turned St. Paul into
something of a remote operations center.

€48/78D Warlock cost more than $500,000%°
because it called on the sophisticated cryptanalyt-
ictest that the Americans had first used in
Bulldozer, automatic plain language recogni-
tions.” Automatic recognition was demanding in
its own way; itcalled for very, very long cribs.
Fortunately, they did not have to be ofa specific
nature. To avoid the “false hits” that came from
short and weak cribs, Warlock used some seven-
ty-five or more ciphertext letters. All of them were
needed just to eliminate much of the handtesting
Hecate runs called for.

€FS4H5B Warlock was amajor engineering
feat because itwas very difficult to turn high-
speed plain language recognition into electronics.
Warlock was piled full ofthe latest electronic
tubes and circuits. With the cipher text in place,
super-fast “digital” electronic wheels sped
through] tweighted each
resulting letter according to its language frequen-
cy, then summed all the results in parallel. An
electronic threshold-testing component decided
ifthe settings and asample of the selected. plain
text should be printed.

 

(TS//SD One hundred thousand tests a sec’.

ond were performed, which meant that the plain
text could be fully examined in twenty minutes. 34

Torun_through the | Ih

 

 

 

so quickly called for over 6,000

 

 

Tubes, crystal diode matrices, trays of relays, flex-
ible electronic matrices, some- binary circuitry,

magnetic drum.

FOP-SECRETHEOMINTHREL-T6-UGA-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-N2LIX P.L. 86-36

“olution made the gene

~.... postwar machine progr:

(TS//SD The first Warlock was a machine
that could attack just one ora few ys~
tems, but its 1953 version was able todo more

; fits ad al ‘ics. Flexibl

 

 

 

machines. For example, Warlock: was asked to,
penetrate the mysterious
machine that served all o

 

 

 

 

 

€ES/485- Although Warlock shared many cir-
cuits, components, and ideas with the general-
purpose computer, itwas a special-purpése
device with much ofthe | internal logic of
Bulldozer. Although 5 very effective, it was a‘one-
function machine, something many in the intelli-
gence community, especially those i in charge of
budgets, disliked.

CFS7/SEr Both the money managers and the
engineers wanted something else, a multipurpose
cryptanalytic computer, one that could perform
any orall the cryptoattacks. Such a ‘machine
would never sit idle waiting for messages from a
particular system, nor would it become a useless
dinosaur like Madame xe !

 
 
  

(U) The Universal Ral

€£5778D Many in OP-20-G and the SIS want-
edto start designing such a universal RAM in
1945. They were not abstract types; their RAM
was tobe tailored to operational cryptanalytic
needs. Those advocates for the universal RAMs
refused to wait until amathematical revolution
transformed cryptanalysis ora technological rev-
-purpose programmed
tatool.

 

computer a competitive

GoysH For thos favor of universal
RAMs, extending the g eral cryptanalytic tech-
niques-that. had prove $0; valuable during the
war seemed the only reasonable path for “G's”

; But they wanted to
“avoid the w waste that v wen along with creating spe-

  
  
  

Page 211
EO 3.3(h)(2)
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA AUS--CAN-GBR-RND-NZEHX 1

cial-purpose machines. Given the unknowns
about future cryptotechnology and the need to
maximize research and development funds, the
wisest choice for them was to create a machine
that could perform all the major cryptanalytic
functions.

CS4/8P Those major functions fell into a few
broad categories. The most important of the cryp-
to-techniques were based upon either locating
repeated patterns, tallying massive numbers of
letter patterns, stripping possible cipher and rec-
ognizing plain text, or performing some form of
“exhaustive searching,” such asdone by the
scritcher machines.

(FS445) The universal RAM was not tobe a
super-calculator for advanced mathematical cal-
culation, or a direct analog of a cryptosystem, nor
one that could becalled adata processing
machine. And although it was agreed it would be
digital and electronic, it was to be something very
special and unique to the cryptanalytic communi-

ty.

<FS//5B In 1945 and early 1946, both agen-
cies made a commitment to find, if possible, their
own versions of one great multipurpose cryptan-
alytic engine.**

(U) The Itlusive Matrix

<F5/758 The call for the universal RAMs
became tied with the search for an electronic
“matrix.” The universal machine needed it and so
did anew type of Bombe, one that could attack
any type of rotor enciphering machine through a
Turing-like analog test. There was also a demand
for anelectronic matrix that would serve as the
heart of all the more digitally oriented dedicated
machines ofthe future, whether they were for
wired-wheel or additive attacks.

€P8/78B The concepts ofthe matrices were

not well formed in1945. Insome instances a
matrix was described as being high-speed memo-

Page 212

ry, in others as an electronic version of a switch,
and in still others as an analog of an encryption
wheel. But whatever the purpose, existing tube
technology made any matrix design very difficult
to construct. The problem that had halted the cre-
ation ofan electronic Bombe in 1942 continued
after the war. The matrices demanded too many
tubes to be practical.

CES44SB Asa result, much ofthe “matrix”
effort was concentrated on developing multipur-
pose tubes and other basic components. That
research became essential to other projects,
including the search for the multipurpose crypt-
analytic machine. **

(#87/SP- In addition to the hunt for the elec-
tronic “wheel” for the universal RAM, both serv-
ices had special-purpose uses in mind for an elec-
tronic matrix. Many in the navy wanted, as soon
as possible, an electronic version of the valuable
but none-too-well-behaved monster, Mercury,
and the army desired a vastly improved version of
its “look-up” devices, the Slide-Run machines. A
few wanted an electronic super Bombe that could
tackle many different machine systems through a
Bombe-like test.

€£S> But the demands for a universal machine
continued. And soon its outline became clear. It
would be something quite different from the pro-
grammable general-purpose computer.

(VU) It’s a Nice Idea, Dr. von Neumann, But...

CTS} As “G” and the SIS focused on their ver-
sions of one great device during 1945 and 1946,
they came to quite similar concepts ofa single
machine that could perform all the general
attacks that had proven so valuable during the
war. Both had visions ofa “computer” that
performed IC tests, crib-dragging, locating, addi-
tive stripping, and weighted plain language test-
ing. The near-universal machines began to
beassigned ageneric name, a “reconfigurable
computer.”
ES#/S5) Neither service was able to build its
ideal “reconfigurable” machine during the 1940s
because of institutional barriers, the primitive
state of some of the underlying technologies, and
emergencies that called for energies to be devoted
to special-purpose machines. But “G” and the SIS
went far towards defining a powerful and unique
cryptanalytic computer architecture through
their Goldberg and Sled projects.

€PS//6H There were differences between the
content and progress of the two grand dreams,
Goldberg at “G” and Sled at the SIS,** but at their
beginnings they shared many fundamentals.

ES/45B Neither ofthe proposed all-purpose
machines was conceived of in terms of the archi-
tecture ofthe modern digital computer. Their
designs were very different, for example, from
what was emerging out of the ENIAC/EDVAC
projects atthe University of Pennsylvania. They
were not single processor, serial, binary, and pro-
gram-driven machines, the type that later became
characterized by the term “von Neumann archi-
tecture.”

8445 Such anarchitecture seemed very
inefficient tothe cryptanalysts. Well into the
1960s there were engineers and cryptanalysts
who remained committed to the idea that the dig-
ital, serial, single memory, program-driven “von
Neumann design” for computers was an inappro-
priate model for codebreaking.

€¥5#/5H Perhaps that was because their con-
cepts of computers were problem, not abstrac-
tion, driven. The proposed army and navy
machines were not born out of considerations of
how to solve any possible logical or mathematical
problem. Neither was intended to be a universal
logic or mathematical device. They were to be
extensions of the hardware and methods that had
evolved at the agencies during World War II.

GS4HS) The first source ofinspiration for
them came from the developments in the tabula-

FOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-TO USA, AUS-CAN OBR AND NZ ET

tor sections. Both agencies had invested in the
creation ofvery efficient relay attachments for
their tabulating equipment. The special IBM
“boxes” became heroic in the eyes of the operat-
ing cryptanalysts and their machine room allies.
Each ofthose minicomputers, some of which
were much larger than the tabulators, performed
aspecial function. The Slide-Run attachments,
for example, stripped additives, then searched a
dictionary of high-frequency code groups. The
navy’s NC tabs were also built from a wide range
of functional relay boxes.

(2S448B Another source ofinspiration was
the RAM program’s faith in electronics and film
and tape inputs. There had been many thoughts
of enlarging the powers ofthe Comparators and
the IC machines through the use of additional cir-
cuits, ones that could be accessed through con-
venient plugboard “programs.” Putting the count-
ing abilities and message-offsetting abilities of
the Comparators together with the locating pow-
ers of the Copperheads and the weighting capa-
bilities of Amber seemed a possibility.

(L8445D Thus, it was asmall evolutionary
step to the central idea ofthe postwar Sled and
Goldberg machines: embody each ofthe major
cryptanalytic functions in separate hardware
packages; create acentral switching mechanism;
tie the packages together in any desired configu-
ration through the switch; and hook it all to free-
standing input/output mechanisms. **

Cs7/S1) With astock ofthe specialized
“boxes,” the agencies could instantly create any
desired cryptanalytic engine. The cryptanalysts
would not have to wait for two or more years for
a traditional type of special-purpose machine to
be built; expensive machines would not become
useless ifan adversary changed his system; and
the machine rooms would not be cluttered with
devices that were used only a few hours a week.

(E8445) In1i945 there seemed, in fact, no
alternative to such a machine. It appeared so nat-

Page 213
—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL—FO-UGA-AUE-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLH——

ural at the time that it did not have to be justified
through a comparison with other possible archi-
tecture. Because the “von Neumann” idea was rel-
atively unknown in 1945, it was only later that the
supporters ofthe multipurpose cryptanalytic
machine concept justified their ideas through
contrasting them to the universal serial comput-
er. But when they did, they outlined an argument
that has had a long life within the SIGINT com-
munity. The arguments against the von Neumann
design have continued for fifty years.

(FS4/5B- By the late 1940s, men in both “G”
and the SIS were pointing out how their linked-
box architecture would allow parallel processing,
the incorporation, whenever desired, of analog
computing, and thus much, much faster process-
ing. They explained that the von Neumann design
would always be too slow because it had only a
single processor todo everything. To be useful,
that processor had to be driven by an outside pro-
gram, step bystep bystep. Hundreds, perhaps
thousands of ticks ofa clock had to go by before
the most simple of crypto-functions could be
completed. Nothing else could be done until the
program cycle was finished.

€3778H) However, the special boxes,
arranged in the right manner, had the potential to
be hundreds oftimes faster than the single
processor device. Hardwired functions would
always be performed in fractions of time it took to
read and execute programmed instructions. And
with the “boxes,” while one function was being
completed, another could be performed. As
important, with a set of function boxes on hand,
no one would have to wait the months, or, as it
turned out, the years it might take to write a com-
plex program for a von Neumann machine.

€667/8P Most advocates of “reconfigurable”
machines agreed on other things in 1945. There
was acommitment to use and, if need be, create
new components. The functional packages should

be built with advanced electronics, if at all possi-*

ble, and with new input and output equipment.

Page 214

Only electronics could make the machines fast
enough to perform the cryptanalytic tests; and for
many of those tests, only new I/O devices would
allow the electronics to work at optimum
speeds. *°

(U) Faith without Institutions: Slides, Sleds,
and Skates

CISH4SB In 1945 “G” and “F” did not realize
how difficult it would beto follow through on
their pledges to create a “universal” cryptanalytic
machine. Who would be willing to build some-
thing just for the SIGINT community? Who
would pay the extra costs that necessarily came
when standard, commercially produced equip-
ment was rejected? Who could be trusted with the
secrets that were embodied in the special devices?

(48/78D Although “G’ and the SIS both spon-
sored programs to create reconfigurable non-von
Neumann machines at about the same time, and
although the two agencies were required to coor-
dinate their efforts,” their responses to those
questions were quite different. The navy began its
project immediately, but did not stay with all the
original intentions for its Goldberg. The army
eventually produced a machine that fit quite well
with the original architectural vision, but it was
almost a decade before its Sled emerged.

(U) Among the many reasons for the different
patterns one stands out: the navy allowed “G” to
create, as will be described, acompany that had
the skills and the mandate to begin work immedi-
ately. In contrast, the cryptanalysts and engineers
at Arlington Hall were left dependent upon the
vagaries of yearly budget allocations and the will-
ingness ofcommercial corporations to subject
themselves to what might become very unprof-
itable projects.

€F3//SB But the army’s project did not begin
with a cloud over it. Leo Rosen’s mid-1945 plea to
extend the reach of the tabulator-relay combina-
tions at Arlington Hall received a warm reception.
The conceptual outlines for what was later called
Sled were inthe making by the end ofthe year,
and there were signs that enough men would be
left in his “F” section to design if not build the new
all-purpose machine. Not all the functions that
were tobe turned into hardware were agreed
upon, but there was little opposition to the idea
that at very minimum, Sled would have to per-
form the cribdragging and dictionary lookup
functions of the invaluable Slide-Run machines of
World War II. More ideas were contributed as to
what functions should be included and, as impor-
tant, how they could be designed to meet the goal
of having, when desired, plugboard-programmed
parallel processing.

€8//8B The evolving ideas even attracted the
cryptanalysts and engineers at“G,” especially
those who had worked with the tabulator and NC
machines. Already mandated by the government
to coordinate as much research and development
as possible, “G” and the SIS agreed they should
work together on Sled. Each looked forward to
having a Sled with electronic components within
a short time.*?

€FS#45B- However, the program ground toa
near halt. Not enough resources and equipment
remained inthe postwar “F” section, and a con-
tractor could not be found toturn rough ideas
into specifications and hardware. Specifically,
IBM was more than hesitant to accept the respon-
sibility for the Sled program.

(4547SB IBM had been agood friend to the
SIS, and somany ofits bright engineers had
learned of codebreaking techniques during the
war that IBM had seemed the logical choice to
turn the “reconfigurable” idea into innovative
machinery. There was also a factor of technologi-
cal continuity. IBM had created the NC and relay-
box devices that were to be paralleled in electron-
icform, and it was the manufacturer of the only
efficient equipment for the cards that had become
the standard “memory” in the tabulator rooms at
both agencies.

¢45//55 IBM was such aclear choice that it
seemed to have been the only one thought of by
the SIS group advocating the Sled architecture.
But IBM was not inthe mood to take on such
work after the war. Its management was not even
extending awelcome tothe requests from the
Bureau of Ships for more NC machines including
a critically needed one to record punch card data
onto microfilm and then, if desired, reverse the
process. °°

484466 IBM’s rejection ofthe army and
navy’s overtures created intense shock at the SIS.
The army’s men almost felt betrayed. They could
make no progress towards a “Sled.” The tensions
between the SIGINT agencies and IBM were
quite evident by early 1947. Even OP-20-G had
become alienated. It had become tired of having
to bend to the whims ofa single supplier and was
willing to spend extra monies on machines, train-
ing, and support to gain more bargaining power.
It was giving very serious consideration to setting
up a processing center based on the products of
IBM’s competitor, Remington-Rand.

CES) The army’s machine group was certainly
losing patience. It helped draft a protest to the
“brass” about IBM’s lack of cooperation, * and
some rather direct words reached Tom Watson.
Asa result, there was more cooperation. In 1947
IBM’s management made sure that ex-members
of the agencies who had returned to the corpora-
tion were assigned as liaison officers.

(8) Men such as James Green and Stephen
Dunwell began to do much to restore harmonious
relations. They arranged little favors such as hav-
ing IBM replace the frequently wornout parts of
the SIS keypunches at no cost to the government.
The cryptoagencies were the only ones at the time
todo extensive binary punching. That wore out
the punches and die blocks in weeks, rather than
inthe years that were typical in business data
centers.

Page 215
“TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL TO USK, AUS, CAN, GBR, AND NZLIX1

8} Green and Dunwell helped keep “F”
informed ofnew technological options. They
made sure that “G” and the SIS were the first to
know about such important IBM advances as its
604 electronic multiplier and its very hush-hush
line of new tabulators. They did more than pass
information from IBM tothe codebreakers; they
began to act as advocates for SIS and “G.”>* They
met with IBM management and argued that the
company would benefit from the Sled research.

€F877SP) But it was not until the summer of
1948 that IBM agreed totake onthe extensive
Sled project.** Then it was not until that fall that
the first specific designs began to receive
approval.

GS4455 Meanwhile, the frustrations at the
SIS had grown to such alevel and the need for a
Comparator for baudot problems became so
pressing that the in-house engineers began
designing an emergency version ofa Sled. At first
called a “tape-comparer,” the machine emerged
in1948 asa rather crude jury-rigged machine.

 

Page 216

But it worked and it evolved step by step into the
Connie Comparators ofthe 1950s. They never
became as flexible as Sled; but they were seen by
their sponsors as general-purpose comparators. **

ES448B While the Connie precursor was
being constructed, IBM acquired a secure build-
ing in Vestal, New York, to work on Sled. IBM
sent some of its best men to help with the project,
including afuture company president, B.O.
Evans.

(F8//S®) Unfortunately, just then, long-term
goals had tobe set aside, atleast for atime. A
cryptoemergency arose. Inresponse, avery
stripped-down version of Sled, with the appropri-
ate name, Skate, was hurriedly produced and
rushed to Washington in 1949 to try to unravel an
intransigent es After a relatively
long shakedown cruise, Skate was put to work as
a primitive electronic version ofa numeric-only
Slide-Run machine. Itwas soon followed bya
more advanced copy, which cost twice as much as
the first, over $500,000."

SOM Raa ap
4

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)
FOP-GEGRET/GOMINTHREL-TO-U6A-kU6-GAN-GBR-ANE-NZEH

£484/8D The Skates were electronic advances,
but costly ones in terms of dollars and manpower
diverted from the Sled ideal. That upset one of the
major figures inthe agency who supported the
Sled architecture, Albert Highley. He knew from
first-hand experience of the need for a ubiquitous
device on the machine room floor. His belief in a
quickly convertible architecture was perhaps
reinforced bythe Skate experience: By the time
the machine became fully operational, the origi-
nal target had disappeared.

(PS) Highley became worried that Sled would
never be turned into hardware. As a result, he and
his associate Ray Bowman began to apply new
pressures on the company. Sled was finally born,
but that was eight years after Leo Rosen had put
forward the general outlines of such a machine
and a year after the SIS and OP-20-G had been
merged into the new organization, the National

Security Agency.*?

(ES4H‘5B What finally arrived in Washington
in the first half of 1953 were two copies of a cus-
tom-made machine whose basic design stood, for
more than two decades, as a tempting alternative
to the general-purpose computers. The Sleds did
not achieve all that had been hoped for in 1945
when the “reconfigurable” design had first
appeared, and they were more expensive than
thought. But they were impressive.

CFS4/5B The two copies cost athird more
than Madame X,but that was not much more
than the previous Skate “pilot” models had cost.®°
And they were inspirations to those who favored
a special cryptanalytic architecture.

CES#78D The Sleds depended upon high-
speed electromechanical tabulator equipment
for their input and output, but they were not ret-
rogressions. The card reading and punching
equipment was used because so much ofthe
information that was to be processed was already
incard form and because printers ofthe time

were too slow to keep up with the electronics that
had been developed.

CES+4SB The Sleds called upon the best large-
scale memory technology ofthe era, magnetic
drums. For the super-fast processes of offsetting
messages, they used advanced delay-line systems.

(F548) The Sleds were built of hardwired
function “boxes” with very advanced circuitry.
Although they did not span the full range of
cryptanalytic functions, those that were included
gave Sled power over a wide range of cryptanalyt-
ic problems. Critical to Sled was its type of “pro-
grams,” acombination of plugboards and elec-
tronic matrices. They allowed instant switching
and concurrent processing.

5/781) The hardwired functions, the fast
memories, and the use of plugboard and elec-
tronic matrix programs were augmented by the
ability to have much parallel processing. But with
or without parallelism, Sled’s speed was impres-
sive. For example, it could make 30,000,000
comparisons a second if desired. In contrast, the
mid-1940s NCR-Gray Comparators worked in
the range of hundreds per second.

CES+ASD Sled could be used as an IC machine,
a crib-dragger, a wired-wheel machine analyzer
and analog, astatistical threshold tester, and
much more. And it could be used for alphabetic as
well as numeric data.

(E8481 One reason for its wide abilities was
its memory systems. Its magnetic drum held a
significant amount of data for the time, 48,000
characters. Its delay lines and special circuits
which could “precess” (offset) two messages
made it a very fast comparator and crib-dragger.
Sled also outdistanced the old Comparators
because ofits thirty-two counters and five accu-
mulators.

CSAS Its electronic weighting circuits
made ita very efficient version ofa plaintext

Page 217
recognition machine, and its circuits for statisti-
cal evaluation also helped in the several modes of
IC analysis. Its “recognition unit” made ita fast
slide-run machine, and it was avery, very rapid
“locator.” Its two large matrices aided it when it
was used to decipher systems, including Enigma-
like ones.

CES44Sb Although the Sleds were honored
because oftheir slide-run “recognition” abilities,
aclever engineer could make them perform a
broad range of functions. One routine made the
testing ofthe suspected reuse of key ona major
system a routine matter.

(FSH/SB For example, 3,000 ten-group por-
tions ofkey had been recovered, and it was
desired to see if any of them had been used on the
messages that continued to flow in. To do that, all
the groups had to be applied to the messages and
the resulting text checked to see which, if any, of
the keys produced a significant percentage of
known code groups. Sled was able to test the
3,000 suspected keys against ten cipher groups in
just fourteen seconds. ©

CSAS) “Programming” Sled was anart,
with the programs looking more like engineering
timing diagrams than the instructions for a digi-
tal computer. ** Despite that, Sled gained so much
loyalty that the first ones were cloned in a super-
fast transistor version bythe late 1950s. As we
will see, a grand elaboration was proposed under
the mid-1950s NSA Farmer program. °*

(U) Faith and an Institution: the Chance to
Begin an ERA

CESHSD OP-20-G had its “reconfigurable”
machine working some four years before the
Sleds.® The reason for the earlier appearance
was not because of more engineering genits with-
inthe navy; it was because of different postwar
institutional arrangements.

Page 218

(U) As the war was winding down, OP-20-G
and the SIS knew they would be stripped of men
and resources. The situation looked bleak.
Rosen’s “F” branch was injeopardy, and
Engstrom’s “M” and the NCML faced extinction.
The Bureau of Ships showed signs of tiring of the
near autonomous NCML, and “M” had its own
special problems because of navy personnel rules.
Holding onto its many exceptional scientists and
engineers was an especially difficult and pressing
problem. Without them, little progress could be
made on methods or machines. There were no
cryptanalytic think tanks, and all the private com-
puting machine contractors made no effort to
hide that they were tired of government work. As
threatening, in 1945 there was no electronic com-
puter industry, and there was little indication that
one would emerge.

(U) Friedman lobbied the army to maintain as
many civilian slots as possible, and he tried to cre-
ate a joint machine development center with OP-
20-G, but he had to settle for a small group in the
SIS that could direct and oversee established con-
tractors.°° Wenger sought much more. Rejecting
the suggestions for ajoint army-navy program,
but later being forced to accept a joint board that
sought to coordinate programs and targets, he
began an independent search for a practical solu-
tion.”

(U) After some initial failures, things began to
fall into place. The secretary ofthe navy took
great pride in OP-20-G’s achievements, and the
Chief of Naval Operations had become an ally.
The Office ofthe Chief of Naval Operations
helped overcome any objections from the bureau,
and the NCML’s life was extended, at least for a
time. Some postwar funding seemed more than a
possibility.

{T8/48D Wenger formed anin-house RAM
panel to take advantage of that and to develop the
technical arguments he would need to fend off
any major threats to his automation program.°?
—TOP-SECRETICOMINTIREE-TO USA,AUS,CAN- GBR AND NZEHAT

(U) Inlate summer 1945 a $500,000, one-
year development contract was awarded to
NCML-NCR. It included funds to work ona new
general-purpose Comparator. Wenger under-
scored the point that the United States could
never again expect to have the time to make and
correct fundamental mistakes asit had during
World War II. He hammered at two other points:
The traditional division between operational and
bureau powers would ill serve amodern navy,
and only acontinuation of something like the
cooperative relations between “M” group, NCR,
and NCML could save naval cryptanalysis. 7°

(U) He was given assurances that OP-20-G
would beallowed its own program and was
told that navy money would be made available
for continuous machine development. Then
Wenger received the wonderful news of the estab-
lishment of Monogram, along-term program to
continue upgrading communications intelligence
equipment and methods. Hooper’s mid-1930s
plan for naval communications and for linking
science to the navy appeared to have finally been
appreciated.

(U) Under project Monogram, every relevant
research project was placed within one integrated
program. Radio research, the mathematics of
cryptanalysis, and even electronic explorations
relevant to the gathering and analysis of signals
were tobe subject toits generosity. Millions of
dollars, itwas pledged, would be allocated for
both research and advanced development proj-
ects.”

(U) More than money was promised. There
was a strong hint of autonomy for “G.” It would be
allowed to direct its own work, free from the
Office of Naval Research, the Naval Research
Laboratory, the naval electronics laboratories
and, toa very great degree, the Bureau of Ships.
Although the other navy agencies continued the
battle tocontrol “G’s” “turf,” the naval Rapid
Machine program had a future.”

—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINFHREL-FEHSAAUS--CAN-OBR ANE NZL

(U) Inlate 1944 Wenger put Howard
Engstrom, Ralph Meader, John Howard and
another of the bright navy engineers, Bill Norris,
to work onHooper’s  suggestions.”? They pro-
posed what they thought was away to perma-
nently link science and innovation to the navy. It
was anew version of Hooper’s post-World War I
RCA. In 1945 Wenger’s men recommended creat-
ing the private, for-profit, National Electronics
Laboratory. The company was to be staffed by the
talented men from OP-20-G and the other
advanced science agencies in the navy.”*

(U) Wenger approved the idea, envisioning a
firm that would devote itself to navy communica-
tions problems,” ranging from mathematical
cryptanalysis to the physics of radio.

(U) The navy’s legal experts gave the green
light to “M’s” officers, such as Engstrom and
Norris, having an interest in the private company.
Most ofthe “M” engineering team, including
Howard, Coombs, and Steinhardt agreed to join,
but those who had been IBM employees decided
to return to their old company. Joe Desch and his
men also opted to stay with their firm, NCR.”°

(U) Soon, however, everything seemed to be
falling apart. America’s old scientific organiza-
tions rejected them. Rockefeller Foundation also
thought America had enough research institu-
tions. A sponsor could not be found, and the situ-
ation became critical. At the end of 1945 Wenger
had his new research agenda and had promises of
contracts, but he had no idea of where to find the
men to build a full electronic Super Bombe, a new
version of Mike, his grand “reconfigurable”
Comparator, oreven aviable punch for the old
Comparators and the Copperheads.”

(U) A savior, at least a minimal version of one,
finally appeared and turned Wenger’s failing
dream into the new company, Engineering
Research Associates. But even the investment
banker, entrepreneur, and old friend of the navy,
John Parker, could not piece together truly ade-

Page 219
EQ 3.3(h) (2)
P.L... 86-36

quate funding. He could not even locate the new
company hear OP-20-G. The proposed research
arm of “G” had-to move to Minnesota. * Coming
incontact with the Engstrom-Norris group
through mutual friends.in the military,” Parker
was persuaded that aprivate version ofthe

NCML-NCR could succeed. He. agreed to gather
minimal financing, to help with business matters,
and to set the new company up in his old factory
in St. Paul, Minnesota.

(U) ERA immediately gained the navy’s ~

approval, and it immediately won OP-20-G’s
big research contract.*° In return “G” expected
ERA to be a “captive” of the navy.

(U) It also won an important friend, OP-20’s
Louis Tordella. One ofthe young officers who
decided tostay in“G” after the war, Tordella
would become one of NSA’s most dynamic lead-
ers. In1946 he began supervising the ERA con-
tracts and acted as a general liaison with the com-
pany. Perhaps because of his interaction with the
ERA engineers and mathematicians, Tordella
became one ofthe future NSA’s most energetic
supporters of high technology as well as one of
the most influential figures inthe history of
American intelligence gathering. ™

 

Page 220

FOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-USAAUS-CAN-CBRE-AND NEL

(U) A Bright Hope for Hooper’s Dreams

C5//8D By mid-1946 ERA had abroad con-
tract with “G,” one that gave it the freedom Bush
had sought in the 1930s. Its men were happy with
competitive salaries, stock inthe company, and
the chance to do cutting edge work in computers,
communications, and operations analysis. There
were indications that ERA might also become a
think tank and a center for advanced mathemati-
cal research.Those efforts, led by C. B. Tompkins,

~.were coordinated with the research of several of

“G's” alumni who had returned to teach at such
prestigious institutions as Harvard and the
University-of Hlinois. They did contract work on
topics such a and the behavior of
binary systems.°* Wenger had a small but effec-
tive cadre within OP-20-G to manage his technol-
ogy program. Joseph Eachus, Howard
Campaigne, and James T. Pendergrass were top-
flight young scientists who appreciated the role of
mathematics and computers in cryptanalysis.

They helped Wenger set up a board to coordinate

the RAM program with the needs of the cryptan-
alysts.*3

(U) Most importantly, ERA was launched on
the mission of creating a multipurpose cryptana-

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

(U) Golcberg

lytic computer. ** But ERA did not start its career
with a leap into fully digital electronic computing.
It began with anattempt tobuild the navy’s
version of Sled. ,

(UV) The Grand Machine of Its Time, the New
Comparator

(U) The hopes for a single grand cryptanalyt-
ic machine had been boiling up at OP-20-G since
1944. But ittook more than a year after Japan’s
surrender before the outlines ofthe machine
called Goldberg got the financial nod from the
Bureau of Ships. ® Joe Eachus had explored pos-
sible technologies and sketched ideas which he
passed onto his old friends who had joined
ERA.” All types of memory media, including
microfilm, were investigated, as were new tubes
and circuit designs.

(U) At ERA the “reconfigurable” general-pur-
pose Comparator Goldberg began as more ofa
research than adevelopment project. Many of
Goldberg’s components were in advanced stages
within its first year, but the machine was not
delivered until late 1949, more than a year behind
its production schedule, and two and one-half

“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TOUS, AUS; CAN-GBR, AND NZL

behind the hopes of its original planners.®” Even
more time was needed to smooth over its opera-
tions. ERA was not finished with the machine
until 1951.°* Goldberg ended up much more of
a special-purpose machine than had been intend-
ed. It did not even become a fully reconfigurable
computer. Operational needs pushed it to becom-
ing an elaboration on the early Comparators, but
one targeted atthe new teletype-encryption
devices.

(U) Goldberg took photoelectric sensing and
paper tape scanning tonew technical heights.
Very fast tape drives were completed by 1947,
allowing as many as four tapes to be run on top
ofeach other. The drives ran the tapes at more
than six times the speed of the older devices and
were able to offset the tapes for IC testing without
slowing the machine. A very complex and precise
scanner was developed which included the photo-
cells and circuits to sense each of the seven data
and three control positions ineach row ona
tape.

(U) Goldberg was also anexample of how
much electronics had matured since 1945 and
how the emergence of new components could
undermine investments inthe development of

Page 221
—~FOP-SECRETICOMINTIRED TO USK-AUS-CAN- GBR ANE NZCIXT—

early technologies. Almost as soon as they were
developed, the new tape systems were abandoned
in favor of a series of emerging technologies.

(F3/78D The first temptation that pulled
attention away from tape or film was electrostatic
storage. For atime it was thought that Goldberg
was to have special television-like tubes and thus,
a “random memory.”?° But when RCA and others
were unable to make such systems operational, a
“second best” technology was selected for
Goldberg, the magnetic drum.

(U) Goldberg was treated tothe slower but
more tractable magnetic drum memory. The sys-
tem included delay lines and sophisticated cir-
cuitry that allowed the tracks of information on
the drums to be offset in the same way that Bush’s
earlier Comparators had slid one tape over anoth-
er.”

(U) Goldberg was given one of the first mag-
netic drums in the world, and “firsts” always have
problems. It took several years of effort to make
the new technology behave. Even in mid-1949
there were problems with the huge drums on
Goldberg.

£48445) Much more than the drum was inno-
vative. Goldberg’s central cabinets were very
impressive. They contained more than 7,000
tubes reflecting the complexity ofits digital cir-
cuits. Going beyond the state ofthe art led
Goldberg into trouble. Atone point inits con-
struction the majority of the tube sockets in the
machine had to be replaced.”

(F544S8P But once inoperation, Goldberg
was able to perform many different cryptanalytic
functions through plugboard “programs.” That
helped fulfill some of its designer’s hopes that it
could be a “reconfigurable” machine. 7?

(64/54) Goldberg could do anything that Mike

or Copperhead orthe old Comparator had done
during the war and much, much more. It could

Page 222

perform so many standard functions that its “spe-
cialized” architecture seemed more suited to
cryptanalytic needs than the proposed general-
purpose programmed computers.

(S45_ It performed frequency counts, IC
tests, round robin searches, crib dragging, wheel
stripping, roughness tests and, among other func-
tions, weighted calculations. It had an advanced
translation system for baud signals and an elec-
tronic 36 x 36 matrix that imitated, if desired, a
wired wheel.** It also had a sophisticated thresh-
old circuit that eliminated the “always print” fea-
ture of Bush’s earlier machine, thus saving much
run time and analyst’s attention.

&57 And Goldberg was fast, although not as
rapid as the later Sled. When Goldberg was in top
shape, it made 20,000 serial comparisons a sec-
ond. That was 250 times the rate of Bush’s 7omm
Comparator. >

(6/7/86 Its thirty-six decimal (ring) counting
circuits allowed deep statistical analysis. In addi-
tion, it had banks of rectifiers for short-term fast
memory, which aided the special circuits used to
calculate the IC statistics.

(8) The Goldberg work led to advances in the
design and use of magnetic technology despite its
drums sometimes being taken off toserve the
emergency needs. Besides its contributions to the
mechanics and electronics ofdrum memory,
Goldberg incorporated a unique way of using its
drums. They were used as “buffers.” To speed
processing, while one drum was providing data
for calculations, the other was loaded with data
from the tapes.”

CPS7/SH Although it was late in coming,
Goldberg was the state-of-the-art “reconfig-
urable” Comparator. Contemporaries thought the
more than $250,000 spent on it was a very wise
investment, worthwhile enough tothink of
replacing the slow and sometimes troublesome
drums with a massive electronic memory.”

CH-FEUC) However, because ofits long-
delayed and sometimes painful delivery, it
seemed best not tobuild any more ofthe “G”
designed general-purpose “comparators.” The
contract for a second machine was canceled. The
progress on the general-purpose computer, Atlas,
and the old SIS group’s faith inthe Skate-Sled
multipurpose machine project at IBM indicated
that the Comparators had outstayed their wel-
come.”

(FS4/48B However, the engineers at ERA and
NSA learned agreat deal from its development
and its perhaps four years of service. They trans-
ferred much of its technology to other machines,
including along line of limited comparator-like
special-purpose devices that were begun in the
late 1940s and early 1950s. The tape-based
Robins and Connies and the ambitious delay-line
Vivians and Dellas took much from Goldberg. ”

(UC) Meanwhile, a Last Chance for Microfilm

GSH» Although the engineers at ERA had
decided microfilm was inappropriate for
Goldberg, there were many in “G” and the SIS
who continued tohave faith inthe future of
Bush’s solution tothe mass memory problem.
While the navy had some engineers who saw Icky
and Hypo as just the beginnings of a major post-
war microfilm program, itwas anarmy group
that had the grandest postwar visions for film
RAMs. Encouraged by the arrival of its microfilm
plus electronic-counter machine in late 1944 and
the about-to-be-completed 5202 Comparator for
the Tunny problem, “F” wanted to order a whole
series of machines from Eastman. Each would
perform one ofthe major cryptanalytic func-
tions."°° The ideas were attractive because film
continued to be amuch higher volume memory
than magnetic devices. Drive speeds did not erase
the difference. In 1949 microfilm data could be

 

read in at five times the speed of data on magnet-
ic drums. *®

(#5//8D The postwar SIS was not allowed to
launch the ambitious film RAM program, and it
was unable to have Eastman-Kodak serve as an
ongoing resource. But the SIS’s film advocates did
begin a project to do the necessary research and
build an upgraded version of the ambitious 5202.
Shortly after the war it hired several small elec-
tronics companies to explore all the possibilities.
One, Hogan Laboratories, had a promising
design. A contract was let, and the SIS would have
avery advanced film Comparator before the end
of the decade. *°*

€6478BH Those who continued tosee the
future of OP-20-G in terms of microfilm received
some funding. With a rather handsome allocation
in hand, they eventually convinced Eastman to do
more than complete World War II’s Ambers. In
1947 Eastman accepted acontract tobegin to
explore possibilities for anew Hypo and anew
Icky. It would take quite a while for Eastman to
deliver the new versions, but in 1947 film again
seemed to have at least the possibility of a rebirth
at “G.”*°3 There was even some thought of having
the Eastman group under Tyler build alight-
based bombe and a new electronic rotor bank. As
promising was an exploration ofa grand idea for
a huge new comparator using large photographic
plates ordrums with asmany as10,000 tiny
holes per square inch. Asthe plates could be
aligned over each other in one-tenth of a second,
a light-based machine to attack the new teletype
encryption machines seemed within reach.*°4

(U) Finally, the Electronic Bombe

(FS7/51) In 1947 there was even more that
gave indications that the cryptanalytic and tech-
nological triumphs of World War II would con-
tinue. Most important was the growing success
against the high-level systems{
Enough had been learned about several of the
L___ kystems allowing the engineers at “G” and

 

Page 223

“P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h) (2)
 

 

 

 

the SIS -to-buil | new _ve versions ofthe Purple
machines. The _ -relay devices (now
especially efficient. -because of a new IBM relay
A technology) were given.the names of less intru-
. + sive colors, such as Tan and: Pink.

 

 

 

| GSAS There was also a series -of electro-
. mechanical analytic machines for the

 

 

, problem. The small machines built bythe in-
\ house engineers were also given “softer” names
‘than those used for similar machines of World
War II. The Stork was one.of many helpful
devices used directly by the cryptanalysts. 108

 

| @8HSP Achievements against the ar-
get went beyond tabletop relay boxes: Perhaps
the: first operating machine touse a magnetic
drum was constructed as a crib-dragger to attack
the ‘very, very important on-line encryption
device the used for much of their top ech-
elon traffic. Beginning work in early 1948, and
using magnetic drums taken from Goldberg, ERA
finished the first of several Demons in October.
Although the Demons had many relays and plug-
boards, they had electronic components and the
circuitry. needed tosearch for high-frequency
clear groups. Follow-on models were flexible
enough to be used against several targets.

 

 

 

SHsH The idea behind the Demon attack
was clever. A large number of cribs were applied
toone message ofa pair determined to have to
been produced by the same key through IC and
similar analyses. The derived key from the first
crib-plain match was applied tothe other mes-
sage. Then, to see if true key had been found, the
result was looked up in the memory, which con-
tained known high-frequency groups.’

CES4/SH More thrilling for the machine
builders was the chance to at last construct a full
electronic Bombe. The explorations ofthe elec-
tronic matrices and the growing knowledge of the
rotor-based, on-lin encryptor
led tothe appropriately named Hiawatha proj-

Page 224

ect."°? Itwas one ofERA’s great challenges
because Hiawatha might cost $1,000,000 and
call for 40,000 tubes and because ERA’s engi-
neers hoped they could construct and design it so

“~~fthat itcould attack more than one teletype

enctyptor.

CrSHSD Hiawatha was i a beginning. To

cover the entire spectrum 0 |devices, “G”
began the Ophis project. Its first goal was anoth-
er electronic rotor, one for an attack on the mys-
terious Albatross machine. Albatross was thought
tobe like Germany’s wired-rotor Green Enigma
of World War II. The SIS and “G” hoped that
Ophis’ long-term result would be a general wired-
wheel Bombe that would be more powerful than
Hiawatha.’

 

€FS+/6_B There were even greater and more
exciting engineering challenges. Bythe time
Hiawatha was conceived, both ofthe American
cryptanalytic agencies were joining the race to
complete the first modern “von Neumann” type
of computer.

(U) Notes

1.458/4/81F NSA CCH Series XII Z, “ANCIB
Minutes, abstract of,” 1955. This also states that the
U.S. was much more technically advanced than the
British. The only edge the British had, it stated, was in
“collateral” information. CF$4465 NSA CCH Series XI
Z, draft copies of Michael L. Peterson, “The Bourbon
Problem,” indicates that early British successes against
Russian cipher machines and their ability to intercept
and process non-Morse transmissions were critical to
convincing the American agencies to extend the World
War Il cooperation and formalize itin the BRUSA
agreement. (87781) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA
Series IVE.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of
COMINT Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957.

2. (FS4488. NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Procurement
of Geheimeschreiber Equipment from British,” J.N.
Wenger, OP-20-G, 14 August 1945.

3. C68) NSA AHA ACC 78098, “Monogram Report,
Part IV, Field Research,” is useful on multiplex needs.

FOR-GEGCRETICOMITHREL-TO-USA-AUS,-CAN,- GBR AND-NZLWAX1
TOR-SECRETCOMINTIRELTOUSA-AUS,-CAN-GER-AND-Nebset—

4.(fS) OnIBM’s reluctance totake on any work
after the war and even into 1947, 45) NSA CCH Series
XII Z,file folder, “Monogram and RAM Panel

Reports,” 1945-1949.

& PLL, 86°36

1946,” 7 October 1946. (84/54) NSA CCH Series XII
Z,H. H. Campaigne to 20-34 L, “Longfellow, History
of.” June 1948. (F8@) NSA CCH Series V.I.1.20,
“Longfellow, Machine Breaking, 1047.” (FS//8D

5.(U) By the 1950s the physics community would __-NSA CCH Series XII Z, “OP-20-G, “History of Navy

seek an alternative to the classic computer architecture
as the demand for increased computing power escalat-
ed. But in the 1940s the codebreakers took the lead in
seeking a different type of electronic computer.

6.48) NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1,
“Machines inthe Service of Cryptanalysis,” 28
September 1954.

7.48448) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA
Series IVE.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of
COMINT Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957.

8. S445 NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA
Series IVE.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of
COMINT Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957, 173.

9. (FS) The hopes of the army cryptanalysts were
expressed in a long memorandum from Frank Rowlett
tothe commander at Arlington Hall in mid-1945,
(#8) NSA AHA ACC 26373, Frank B. Rowlett, “RAM in
Future Cryptanalysis,” 3 May 1945. Note, however,
that his vision was less far reaching than those
expressed in Wenger's plans for RAMs at OP-20-G.
For example, see (F&} NSA CCH Series XII Z,CNO
toChief Bureau ofShips, “Communications
intelligence: Research and Development,” 21
December 1945, and, Wenger to Eachus, “Analytical
Machinery Panel,” 31 October 1946.

10. (F8//8T) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA
Series IVE.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of
COMINT Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957.

1. SAS—) (B&Q) NSA CCH Series VI.1.8,
“Martini,” circa 1947. OnInitram, (#5 NSA CCH
Series XII Z,J. F.Beatty, “Martini (Longfellow),”
OP-20, 1947. The old Japanese analogs, such as
Python, contributed their parts tothe anti-Soviet
cause. See also the army’s Tan analog ofthe
Longfellow machine. Exciting sources on the progress
against one ofthe Soviet’s most sophisticated and
important cipher machines are found in ($8468 NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “Longfellow, History of,” N-31 to
20-L, June 1948.

12. €FS448D (TS) NSA CCH Series XIf Z,H. H.
Campaigne, “Summary of War Diary September

— Md ; Ci iN, san, AD MELE

Attack on Longfellow,” 14 December 1949.

13. (2S448H On the frustrations caused by the
Soviet “54/5 NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings.” One large set of comparators, the
Robins, was built just for the problem but achieved lit-
tle. GS+4SH NSA CCH Series XII Z, AFSA-21
“Summary ofthe Early Operation ofthe Robin
Machinery,” 19 May 1951.

14. (E8445) When the world situation began
tounravel inthe late 1940s, not enough was known
about some of the more important Soviet machines to
allow a fast technological solution such as the Bombe
program of World War II. The United States did not
know enough about the wired-wheel Albatross
machine, for example, toallow the construction ofa
massive analog-analytic machine like the Bombe.
(FS4/SH NSA AHA ACC 18669, AFSA-02, “Request
for establishment of Comparator Project (Albatross),”
6 June 1950.

15. GS-81) Oliver R. Kirby, “The Origins of the
Soviet Problem: APersonal View,” Cryptologic
Quarterly, Vol. 11#4 (Winter 1992), 51-58, gives an
insight into the SIS’ fears about being ordered not to
pursue the Soviet problem. S485 The series of his-
tories by CCH historian Michael L. Peterson published
in Cryptologic Quarterly ,1994-95, shows the navy
was working under the same fears.

16. (S++454) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948, provides a summary of
the devices planned at the end of the war.

17. 84465 OP-20-G invested much in the inno-
vative Hecate machine, which was inthe planning
Stage by the end of the war. It is described below as is
amore general-purpose device, Alcatraz, which was at
first targeted a . S448) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, AFSA-351B, “The Use of Hecate in

L ‘] October 1950.

18. (FSA/6H On Hecate, (5) NSA CCH Series XII

MPRO, Box 1, “Machines inthe Service of

 

Page 225

EO 3.3(h) (2)
P.L. 86-36
FOP-GEGRET/OOMINTHREL-F6-UGA-AUS--CAN-GBR-AND-NZEIE—

Cryptanalysis,” 28 September 1954. (FS¢/6+) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Mechanization inSupport of
Comint, Phase IT,” circa 1955. (£8} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “General and Special Purpose Computers: A
Historical Look and Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May
198 (Hogan). And there seemed noneed torush its
development and construction.

19. (S455 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report IJ,” 21 December 1948, states that 32 Bombes,
2Grandads and 4 Duennas were still available as of
1-31-49. The Autoscritcher was retired in 1945.

20. (U) Auseful overview of the Hagelin enterprise
and influence is Boris C. Hagelin, David Kahn (ed.),
“The Story ofthe Hagelin Cryptos,” Cryptologia,
XVH #3 (July 1994), 204-242.

 

 

 

 

20, GES) NSA CCH Series XII Z, L. R. Steinhardt,
“Digraph Counter, Improved, Conference On,” 11 July
1945.

23. (FSS Oliver R. Kirby, “The Origins of the
Soviet Problem: APersonal View,” Cryptologic
Quarterly, Vol. 11 #4 (Winter 1992), 51-58. Note that
in 1945 and 1946 even the president was unsure of the
relationship between the United States and the Soviets
and argued against reading their messages

24. (TSA48) 65) NSA CCH Series XII Z,L. R.
Steinhardt, “Digraph Counter, Improved, Conference
On,” 11 July 1945, (TS//SD) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Office of Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

{2S} NSA CCH Series XII Z,“The System [[____}...

(Alcatraz),” AFSA-351Bm circa 1950. (S) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,“ERA Task #7 Alcatraz,” circa 1949.
£28} NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder, “Monogram
and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949. There is some
confusion in the records over the production of a Baby
Alcatraz. The best judgment seems to be that when the

Page 226

—TOR-SECRETICOMIITHREL TOES A-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND NEEM

proposed size of machine was reduced, it was called,
by some, “Baby,” and that only one machine was built.

25. (64485 NSA CCH Series XII Z,Sam Snyder,
“Draft Document, Pre-Computer Machines in Support
of Cryptanalysis,” circa 2 February 1978.

26. ($3 NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, Box 12,
“Analytic Machinery Principles,” September, 1949, 37.
(FS4463 NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley.
“Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May 1953.
(U) Charles J. Bashe etal., IBM’s Early Computers,
(Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 464.

27. (S+/8t) ( NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam
Snyder, Box 12, “Analytic Machinery Principles,”
September, 1040, 37. (F8446R NSA CCH Series XII
Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in
NSA,” 30 May 1953. (U) Charles J. Bashe et al., IBM’s
Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986),
46. NSA's precursors acquired atleast the next and
more powerful version of the 603, the 604, and put it
to use with tabulators stripping additives.

28. (S//SBH (U)) James W. Cortada, Historical

'. Dictionary of Data Processing: Technology (New
“York: Greenwood Press, 1987), 366. See also the

unpublished work onthe early Remington-Rand
machines by this author.

'29. (£S4/5H NSA CCH Series XII Z, A. M. Gleason,
“Inversion of Matrices with O'Malley,” 1948.

30. “¢ NSA CCH Series XH Z,“Use of
ancareE_] Message Placement,” October
1950, and SASL) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept
by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.”

31. CrS+/8P. NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA, “MPRO
Technical Reports,” circa 1956.

32. (FSD NSA CCH Series XU Z, A. M. Gleason,
“Inversion of Matrices with O'Malley,” 1948.

33. (FR NSA CCH Series XIL MPRO, Box 1,
“Machines in the Service | of “Cryptanalysis,” 28
September 1944. ‘

34. (FSA) (Laconie_Neesa) NSA CCH Series

XI Z, Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty: ‘Years of Mathematical

Cryptanalysis,” August 1985.” A(T. 8/ /SD NSA CCH
Series X11. Z, “Office of Computers;. List of Computers,”
nd.

35. (U) NSA CCH. Series XII Z, , NSA-OH-07-83,
Oral History Interview with. Beverly R: hall, 2 May

1983.

 

“PLL.
EO 3.3(h

86-36
36. (SSI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Mechanization in Support ofCOMINT, Phase
II,”circa 1955.

37. FS} NSA CCH Series XII Z,ERA, Contract
Number Nobsr-42001, “Preliminary Report and
Proposal, Task: Project Warlock,” 9 June 1948. (S)
NSA CCH Series XII Z,ERA, "Warlock Progress
Reports, ERA Task 18,” 21 November 1947 to 10 April
1951.

38. GSA48H NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

39. CGS+468 (Laconie—Neeen) NSA CCH Series
XII Z,Glenn F.Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical
Cryptanalysis,” August 1985. CIS¢464) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings.” £[5134}]. (8/781) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “Fifty Years ofthe Soviet Off-Line Machine
Cipher,” 10 January 1989.

40. (PS46R NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA,
Contract Number Nobsr-42001, “Preliminary Report
and Proposal, Task: Project Warlock,” 9 June 1948.
Warlock borrowed from the Whirlwind Project at MIT.
But it seems to have used a unique three-value logic for
its weighing system to save tubes and processing time.

41. 87431) Apparently, the rush of work in World
War I! led to the Americans not gaining enough skills
tomake independent attacks onthe Tunny-like
machines. (1$4/ST} NSA CCH Series XII Z, S-2733,
“Longfellow, History of,” by Howard Campaigne, June
1948. CISA/SP Oliver R. Kirby, “The Origins of the
Soviet Problem: A Personal View,” Cryptologic
Quarterly, Vol. 11#4 (Winter 1992), 51-58. Alist of
priorities from late 1947, after world events had put
more pressure on the agencies, still reflect the faith in
a general-purpose machine. 6684458) NSA CCH Series
XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 17, “Long Range Cryptanalytic
Program for Literal Systems,” December 1947.

42. 6FS4468 The philosophy of “reconfigurable”
machines and universal components underwent sever-
al modifications during the era, but the goal remained
the same. For alater interpretation, @8) NSA CCH
Series XII X-MPRO, U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and
Development Committee, “Joint Long Term Program
for Research and Development inthe Field of
Cryptanalytic Equipment,” 21 July 1948.

TOR SECRETICOMNT REL TOUS AAU S—CAN-GBR—AND-NZ HK

43. (PSST) NSA AHA 36746, Engineering
Research Associates, Inc., “Proposal for An Electronic
Rotor Program,” 19 December 1946. On the continued
search by the navy for high-speed components for the
matrix, the Leo Project, which came toinclude the
exploration of most basic technologies, including
saturable cores, 5} NSA CCH Series XII Z, LEO:
progress Report, ERA Task #11, 1September 1947 -
1October 1948. Onthe army’s extensive basic
electronic research during the late 1940s, (TS//SD
NSA CCH Series IV.C.2.14, ASA, “Annual Reports for
the Fiscal Year 1949, Vol. II, Research and
Development Division,” Washington, 30 June 1949.
The amounts invested in such research indicate that
the SIGINT agencies must have played a significant
role in pushing the development of tubes and transis-
tor technology.

44. CS+5) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948, 9,shows that Sled
became a joint army-navy project with the Bureau of
Ships managing the contract. But the Sled concept
seems to have originated at the SIS.

45.<434/S8- On the army plans, Rosen (F8€) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on
Ram Panel Meetings;” on the navy’s (38) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,“General and Special Purpose
Computers: A Historical Look and Some Lessons
Learned,” 23 May 1986, (Hogan); and on the navy’s
participation in Sled 48} NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H.
Howard, “Conference on Slid(e)-Run Machine,”
5 January 1946; CE8}+NSA AHA 36746, Engineering
Research Associates, Inc., “Proposal for An Electronic
Rotor Program,” 19 December 1946; (F8S//ST) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Joint Long Term Program
(Old Planning Material, 1948-1949) compiled by
Doug Hogan.

46. €S//55 Leo Rosen outlined his idea ofa
reconfigurable electronic machine in (ISZ4S4) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on
Ram Panel Meetings.”

47. £37785 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” Joint
Research And Development Board Memoranda.

48. (F87/8T7 NSA CCH Series XH Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.

Page 227
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL “TO USA, AUS, CAN CBR ANE NEL RT

49. (84/85 NSA CCH Series XII Z, J. H. Howard,
“Conference on Slid(e)-Run Machine,” 5 January
1946.

50. (F844 NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949.

51. (76 NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949.

52. (S}+ Onthe 604, (S) NSA AHA ACC 8544,
“Memorandum for Members of RAM Panel, New I. B.
M. Tabulator,” circa 1948-9.

53. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, folder marked,
Snyder, “Precomputer Comments,” circa 1978,
“Possible Item of Interest.”

54. CFS‘/STT NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948.

55. G@S4S NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L.
Sapp, “The Analytic Machines,” circa 1955. (TS//SD
NSA CCH Series XTi Z,LeRoy H. Wheatley,
“Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May 1953.
FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Sam Snyder, draft copy
of, “Pre-Computer Machines in Support — of
Cryptanalysis,” circa February 1978.

56.L12S¢/81) NSA CCH Series XI K Snyder, Box 10,
10-27-77 Folder.

57. (F J.J. Eachus, “SIGMAGE Threshold
Control,” 2July 1946. 6} NSA CCH Series XII Z,
BuShips, “Specifications Sled Navy Models CXOA and
CXNQ Block Diagrams,” 1October 1048. (F6+/5))
NSA CCH Series XI Z, “Communications
Supplementary Activities, RAMP Report Ii,”
21 December 1948. &S) NSA AHA ACC 10842,
Ray L. Bowman,” Engineering Diary,”circa 1945-1950.

58. (454/65 On the Skates (C} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, Descriptions of NSA Early SPDs and
Computers, ascompiled from various NSA sources,
and, ¢64468- NSA CCH Series XII Z,Herbert W.
Worden, “EDP Machine History.” Apparently both

 

 

 

 

inlate 1948. See Michael L. Peterson, (PS7754)
“Beyond Bourbon,” 1948, 4. The Skates were flexible
enough, however, to be used on other problems.

59. (LSA6t NSA AHA ACC 10842, Ray L.
Bowman, “Engineering Diary,” circa 1945-1950.

Page 228

FOP-SECREHICGHINT IE

60. 68-454) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Samuel S.
Snyder, “Pre-Computer Machines in Support of
Cryptanalysis,” draft, circa 16 February 1978, [V-25.
(F844) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of Computers,
List of Computers,” nd.

61. 48/781 The Sled was constructed of two large
interconnected cabinets; the term “boxes” is used for
convenience.

62. (£8 NSA CCH Series XII MPRO, Box 1,
“Machines inthe Service of Cryptanalysis,” 28
September 1954, 10.

63. €684/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L.
Sapp, “The Analytic Machines,” circa 1955.

64. 15/4817 NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA, “MPRO
Technical Reports,” circa 1956. The price tag was not
inconsequential. The transistor version cost approxi-
mately $2,000,000.

65. (F57/SBH NSA CCH Series XH Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. A pilot model of
the proposed Sled, which was completed to help with
the Soviet problem, was Skate. It arrived in late 1949;
the version that was closer to the original grand inten-
tions, Sled, was delivered in early 1953.

66. (U) Friedman sought ajoint army-navy pro-
gram, but the navy never accepted the idea. NARA
RG457, SRMA-o11, “Senior Staff Meeting Notes,”
April 3, 1945, “Friedman’s joint work suggestion,” 174,
231, 321. Samuel S.Snyder, “Abner: The ASA
Computer, Part 1: Design,” NSA Technical Journal, 25
(1980): 49. On turf battles among the services, Louis
Kruh, “Army-Navy Collaboration for Cryptanalysis of
Enemy Systems,” Cryptologia , 16 (1992): 145-164.

67. (TS4/SQ NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Joint Long
Term Program (Old Planning Material, 1948-1949)”
compiled by Doug Hogan.

68. (LB-Robert William Love, Jr., The Chiefs of
Naval Operations (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1980), 137-192.

69. (F545) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by

_ Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.”

70. (U) NSA RAM File: August 21, 1945,
“Continuation and Development of Communication
Intelligence”; Part Il of Report to J. N. Wenger, Capt.
USN, “Resume ofthe Dayton, Ohio Activity During
World War.I,” December 21, 1945, CNO to BuShips,

“PLL. 86-36
EO 3.3(h) (2)
“Continue tofund NCML”; and March 21, 1946, OP-20-
G “History of Formation of ERA.”

71, (U) NSA AHA ACC 40731A, SRMN-084, “The
Evolution of the Navy's Cryptologic Organization.” The
importance and scope of Monogram for advancing inter-
cept capabilities and mathematics in cryptanalysis is
reflected in, (2S NSA 40 AHA ACC 7808, “Monogram
Report,” 29 November 1949. (LS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Report ofthe Second Computer Study Group,” asin
NSA Technical Journal, XTX (Winter 1974), 21-61.

72. £F) (U) NSA RAM File, December 20, 1945,
“ERA postwar research plan,” and July 20, 1946,
Engstrom: BuShips,”Use Naval laboratories, not ERA.”
ON the Bureau of Electronics attempts to control OP-20-
G’s part in Monogram, {5} NSA AHA ACC 7808,
“Monogram Report,” 29 November 1949.

73. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-267, “History of
Engineering Research Associates.” NSA RAM File,
September 12, 1947, “Minutes of OP-20-2 Research
Committee Meeting.”

74. (U) NARA RG457, SRH-267, “History of
Engineering Research Associates.” NSA RAM File,
January 2,1945, Wenger OP-20-G toCNO, “Plan for
ERA,” and August 21, 1945, “Continuation and
Development of Communication Intelligence [ERA].”

75. (U) NARA RG457, SRMN-084, “The Evolution
of the Navy's Cryptologic Organization,” 15.

76. (U) Bright mathematicians and physicists also
joined the new company. Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 2015, Unprocessed ERA Materials, ERA,
Personnel Summaries, circa 1946, and Engstrom to
Norris, September 11, 1946. The Staff of Engineering
Research Associates, High-Speed Computing Devices
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1950). All departments of the
navy were concerned about how tocontinue _ their
advanced scientific work. U.S. Naval Administration in
World War II, War History ofthe Naval Research
Laboratory, Guide No. 134, and Harvey M. Sapolsky,
Science and the Navy: The History of the Office of Naval
Research (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990).

77. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
2015, Unprocessed ERA Materials, Engstrom to Norris,
September 11, 1946. NSA RAM File, December 20, 1945,
“ERA post war research plan,” and December 21, 1945,
CNO to BUShips, “Continue to fund NCML.”

TOR-SECRIFICOMAFH REL —FO-U6h-AUG GAN -GBR ANB NZD

78. (U) The Charles Babbage Institute holds many
informative interviews with ERA founders.

79. (U) Important was Nelson Talbott, the powerful
Dayton business executive.

80. (U) Charles Babbage Institute, “An Interview
With James Henry Wakelin, Jr.,” OH 104, Conducted
by Arthur Norberg, February 27, 1986. Hagley Museum
and Library, Accession 2015, Unprocessed Remington
Rand / ERA materials, ERA Minute books 1946. NARA
RG457, SRH-267, “History of Engineering Research
Associates,” 6-7. NSA RAM File: March 8, 1946, John
Parker toSecretary ofthe Navy, “Plan for ERA”;
March 8, 1946, OP-20-G, “List of research projects and
secret ERA contract of 12-21-45”; and March 21, 1946,
OP-20-G “History of Formation of ERA.”

81. (U) Onthe expectations that ERA would bea
Strictly navy firm, (U) NSA AHA ACC 40731A, SRMN-

084, “The Evolution ofthe Navy's Cryptologic
Organization.”
82. CSASH) NSA CCH Series XII Z,

“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948. A somewhat later but very
interesting project was concentrated on the mathematics
of sorting -€8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA A. E. Roberts,
“An Experiment inthe Rearrangement of Data
(Sweater),” (Sorting, Nomad) 1 May 1950.

83. (s+Sh NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948.

84. (U) NSA RAM File, December 20, 1945, “ERA
postwar research plan.” Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 1901, Yuter Papers, June 6,1946 to July 28,
1946,. ERA-NCML on “Orion-Goldberg Project,” and
August 4-8, November 1-9, 1946, ERA reports “Orion-
Goldberg, binary and analog magnetic recording.”
Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 2015,
Unprocessed Remington-Rand / ERA materials, August
17,1946. “ERA salaries.” NSA RAM File: August 14,
1947, Bureau of Ships toERANCML “Task contracts
causing problems’; June 3, 1946, NCML to ERA, “have
your work approved”; and July 22, 1946, CNO to
Secretary of the Navy, “Project Monogram.”

85. CES+/8H) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr.
Campaigne onRam Panel Meetings.” OP-20-G had
asked IBM totake ona long-term research contract in
1945 and again in 1946, but was refused.

Page 229
“TOP -SECRETHCOMINTIREL-FO-UGA-AUG,-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX4

86. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1901, Yuter Papers, September 1946 November 1, 1946
reports “Orion-Goldberg, binary and analog magnetic
recording.”

87. (CISL4SR- NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948.”

88. (£877ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. 65} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “Goldberg Progress Reports,” 30 December 1947
through 10 April 1951. (F86) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.”

89. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
1901, Yuter Papers: Goldberg Reports July-August,
1946; January 1, 1947; and September 22, 1947.

90. (€S445—R- NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948.

91. 4S} NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949, gives
the date of the commitment to magnetic drums as early
1947.

92. (FS4481) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949.

93. C1S¢/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General and
Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and Some
Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986.

94. £8) NSA CCH Series X1K, Sam Snyder, Box 12,
“Analytic Machinery Principles,” September 1949.

95. 77ST) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Symbols with
their meanings for GOLDBERG programming,” nd. On
the speed ofthe 7omm Comparator, (ES) NSA CCH
Series XII MPRO, Box 1,“Machines inthe Service of
Cryptanalysis,” 28 September 1954.

96.45)NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, Box 12,
“Analytic Machinery Principles,” September 1941 43.

97. GS+/8H NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office
of Computers, List of Computers,” nd. Onthe drum
problems, £8} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Goldberg Progress
Reports,” 30 December 1947 through 10 April 1951.

98. (U//FE8O) NSA CCH Series XH Z, Sam Snyder,
“Draft Document, Pre-Computer Machines in Support
of Cryptanalysis,” circa 2 February 1978, IV-15.

99. (FS-781) (U) Hagley Museum and Library,
Accession 1901, Yuter Papers, ERA, Goldberg Reports,
July 1946, September 1946, and January 1,1947. On

Page 230

PL. 86-36
' EO 3.3(h) (2)

Vivians, (IS448 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of

Computers, List_of Computers,” nd. and their use v
[ |@S4SH NSA CCH Series XII
Z,“Mechanization in Support of COMINT, Phase II,”
circa 1955.

100. 687/59) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “History of the
Signal Security Agency, Volume Two, The General
Cryptanalytic Problems.” (1) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“The Status of RAM,” circa June 1945. ) NSA AHA
ACC 26373, SIS, “Technical Paper, RAM,” circa June
1945. (&) NSA AHA ACC 20373, SIS Chief “F’ Branch,
“Request for RAM Equipment,” 23 March 1945. ) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, OP-20-G, “SSA Proposal for 7omm
Film LC. Machine,” 8 June 1945.

101. }.NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, Box 12,
“Analytic Machinery Principles,” September 1949.

102. €FS77STY NSA CCH Series IV.C.2.14, ASA,
“Annual Reports for the Fiscal Year 1949, Vol. II,
Research and Development Division,” Washington, 30
June 1949. (F581) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

103. fF8S47SR NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949.
HYPO II was not delivered until 1952. There was also
a project to explore the possibilities of computer output
microfilm during the late 1940s. The Eastman contract
was less than one tenth of what was allocated to ERA, but
it was appreciable. 48} NSA CCH Series XII] X-MPRO,
U.S. Cryptanalytic Research and Development
Committee, “Joint Long Term Program for Research
and Development inthe Field of Cryptanalytic
Equipment,” 21 July 1948. (G644SH) NSA CCH Series XII
Z,H. H.Campaigne, “Conference About Squinter,”
15 November 1949. (F&44H) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948.

104. CES4465 NSA CCH Series XU Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” and, 4) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, H.H. Campaigne, “Conference About
Squinter,” 15 November 1949.

105. (FSS NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAM
Report II,” 21 December 1948, 19.

106. 54468 NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports,” 1945-1949, and,

 
FOP-GEGRETHOOMINTHREL-FO-USA UGC AN-GBR-AND-NZEHIE

( NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA, “Demon II Progress
Reports,” 15 July 1948 to April 1951.

107. (SASTJ NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948,” states that Hiawatha was
begun on March 1, 1948, only to face the disappearance
of Longfellow from the airwaves on April 11.

108. S4/5B NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Longfellow,
History of,” N-31 to20-L, June 1948. 68) NSA AHA
ACC 8252, OP-20-G, “Communications Intelligence
Research Plans, 1948,” 7 April 1947. G48) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, file folder, “Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports,” 1945-1949. (S4489 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report Ii,” 21 December 1948.

Page 231
This page intentionally left blank

Page 232 , ; ;
-FOP-SEGRETHCOMINTHREL-USAAUSCAN- GBR AND NZEIAT

Chapter 8

(U) Courage and Chaos: SIGINT and the Computer Revolution

 

 

 

 

(U) It Wasn't Safe at the Cutting Edge

(U) Well before the plans for Goldberg and Sled
had matured, OP-20-G, joined abit later by SIS,
started agreat adventure. They became part of
what many see as one of the most important tech-
nological revolutions in history. The SIGINT agen-
cies became active players in the attempt to make a
technical fantasy come true — to build a universal
machine. “G” and the SIS, along with several other
military and civilian agencies, became prime
movers in the early stages of the computer revolu-
tion. Establishing that historic foothold was not
easy for either SIGINT group.

(U) Anidea had emerged and became some-
what formalized outside of the intelligence commu-
nity by 1945. It was going to be possible to have a
high-speed electronic computer that could mimic
any mathematical or logical process. With a rapidly
changeable program, it had the potential tobe a
machine for every purpose, from calculation to
machine control. The key to the machine’s flexibili-
ty was its simplicity. It was to have very, very few
hardwired functions, perhaps just the four basic
arithmetic ones, and a few that allowed the move-
ment ofdata between the input-output compo-
nents, memory, and the single central processor.
That and the organization ofthe machine around
the binary system would, it was hoped, make it rel-
atively inexpensive and allow it to become a mass-
produced product. With one piece of hardware that
could be made to imitate any machine through an
inexpensive and easily changed set of instructions,
the new computer had agreat future. It would
replace all other calculation and, perhaps, data pro-
cessing devices.

(U) The ideas for the universal computer that
began totake definite shape in England and the
United States in 1946 were very appealing. As soon

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZL

as they heard ofthem, mathematicians and engi-
neers within “G” and the SIS pleaded with their
superiors to make programmed computers part of
the SIGINT arsenal. They were persuasive. By 1947
both agencies had committed themselves to acquir-
ing general-purpose “computers.”

(U) Neither agency realized what traumas they
would have to go through to obtain them, however.
Especially in the case of the SIS, the postwar expe-
rience was as anxiety-filled as the trials that Hooper
and Wenger had gone through inthe mid-1930s
when they sought Vannevar Bush’s help.

(U) Because Wenger had been able to set upa
semicaptive engineering corporation in 1946, OP-
20-G had aneasier time than the army did. But
even “G” and its Engineering Research Associates
had some very tough moments trying to make the
new computer come to life.

(U) That had not been foreseen in 1946. After
learning of the possibilities of the new architecture,
each agency had expected that outsiders would pro-
vide all that was needed. That was naive. The SIG-
INT agencies soon found it necessary to do much,
much more than they anticipated. Because of the
chaos that marked the development of the comput-
er industry inthe postwar era, both had to create
their own machines.

(U) An Idea Differed

(U) In1945 while the ambitious Goldberg’s
technology, if not its architecture, shifted with the
appearance oftechnical innovations, and while
machines like O’Malley were being constructed for
immediate problems, another and more adventure-
some project began at “G.”*

Page 233
 

Page 234

FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USAC AUS, CAN OBR AND NECIAT

(U) Duenna and the other “electronic”
machines of the last two years of the war, com-
bined with the knowledge of what other comput-
er projects inthe nation were attempting, gave
the “M” group some ideas about a general-pur-
pose computer. It was to be one much more flex-
ible than Bush’s older Rockefeller Analyzer or
even his purely electronic Rapid Arithmetic
Machine.

(U) When they had afew moments for reflec-
tion in1944 and 1945, Engstrom and others in
“M” speculated about what they could accomplish
if they could find a large and fast memory, such as
the vastly improved versions ofthe delay lines
they were already experimenting with, to add to
anelectronic processor. While RCA’s Jan
Rachman’s new idea for an all-electronic comput-
er was rejected as almost “screwball,” “M’s” men
kept thinking about the future. Ifa large memory
with aspeed that came close to that of the elec-
tronic processor could befound, then they
thought a general-purpose computer was a possi-
bility.

(U) But unless there was a high-speed memo-
ry, electronic processors would have to remain as
special-purpose devices. Until the software could
keep up with the speed of the processor, there was
little need for electronics. Ifan electronic com-
puter depended upon tape readers or the like for
its directions, it could be no faster than the slow
mechanical components.

(U) The input speeds of the best tape and card
readers of the era were orders less than electron-
ic processors. That limitation was compounded
by the serial nature of both technologies. It was
impractical to ask tape and card systems to back
up to previous positions and repeat the reading of
data or “instructions.” Auniversal computer
needed a memory that could support “go to” com-
mands because tapes and cards could not fulfill
that need.

€E3778H The limitations imposed by the

absence of high-speed memory were one ofthe
reasons why the Sled architecture seemed so
appealing. With special “boxes” hooked together
through plugboard programs, processing was not
dependent upon the nonexistent memory. The
absence of memory was also one of the reasons
why IBM and other business machines manufac-
turers confined their postwar electronic offerings
to limited and special-purpose attachments, such
as multipliers and dividers that hooked onto tab-
ulators.”

(U) In 1945, any engineer who thought about
moving further than the Aiken-IBM combination
of motors, shafts, and tape readers, or the Moore
School’s set of ENIAC special-purpose boxes
“programmed” through resetting huge electrical
cables, had to have a great deal of faith. He had to
believe that some technological hints would soon
become viable and affordable hardware. There
were some indications that such dreams might
come true. But in 1945-6 they were just indica-
tions.

(U) Some thought that delay lines, tubes filled
with chemicals, could be reengineered to serve as
memories. The young experts at the University of
Pennsylvania who were building the ENIAC felt
they could convince delay lines from radar sets to
behave well enough to hold programs as well as
the data needed for immediate processing. That
was acourageous commitment because those
“acoustic” delay lines were very temperamental.
It was very difficult to regulate the timing of the
pulses that flowed through them. Slight changes
inambient temperature caused serious distor-
tions. Also, it was difficult to monitor the behav-
ior of the crystals that sensed the data “pulses” at
each end of the tube. Even when all the technical
difficulties were eliminated, a fundamental prob-
lem remained. The tubes could hold only afew
“bits.”

(U) There were some other memory possibili-
ties being discussed atthe end ofthe war. One

—~“TOP-SECRETHICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZOIKT
“TOP SECRE TICOMINTIREL USA AUS—CAN-GBR-AND-NZLHKE

was to use a variation of the emerging television
technology to store and recover “dots” of infor-
mation onan oscilloscope-like screen. Ifit could
be made to work, it would be an ultra-fast memo-
ry. Acomputer would not have to “wait” until the
information it needed cycled past a sensing sta-
tion. It would run at electronic speeds and would
allow parallel data transmission. ?

(U) There were more esoteric ideas for power-
ful memories, such as RCA’s Selectron and the
use of magnetics, but they were even less ready
than the other alternatives.

6) Although the engineers at OP-20-G knew
of the technological limits, they could not pass up
achance toat least survey universal computer
options. John Howard formalized some of the
ideas ina June 1945 memorandum; then, along
with the “G” mathematician, C.B. Tompkins,
toured all the East Coast computer projects look-
ing for more ideas.* But little came of their trips.
“G” was too busy to explore other than cryptana-
lytic machines. That remained true for several
months after the war ended. Its workload even
prevented “G” from sending arepresentative to
one of the earliest postwar computer meetings.

(U) When Howard Engstrom received an
invitation to participate ina major navy sympo-
sium on computers, he replied that “G” had done
little of the type of work that was to be discussed
and that he and his crew were too busy to attend.

(U) The urge to explore the possibilities ofa
general-purpose computer continued. But little
could be achieved. “G” found it difficult to acquire
connections to the outsiders, especially the aca-
demics, who seemed to be taking the first major
steps towards creating the modern computer.
“G’s” old scholarly friend and go-between,
Vannevar Bush, had stepped back from OP-20-G
when the war broke out and did not try to
reestablish the 1930s relationship. That left “G”
without a prestigious outside scientist who could

~FOP-SECRETHEONINTTREL 9A A0G-6AN-GBR-AND-NZEHE

provide the critical endorsements speculative
projects needed.

(U) Bush also decided not to return to MIT.
He remained in Washington, acting as something
ofan academic elder statesman and high-level
science policy maker until his retirement. Among
his many contributions, he gave advice onthe
future of science in the military. In addition, Bush
was frequently called upon to make recommen-
dations concerning the integration of the nation’s
intelligence services. His role as a science advisor
to President Eisenhower also played an impor-
tant part in SIGINT mechanization in the 1950s.°

(U) Bush stayed at quite a distance from the
computer developments ofthe postwar era. He
also stayed away from OP-20-G, except for a few
courtesy visits that Joseph Wenger arranged. One
reason for Bush’s arm’s length relationship was a
very heated argument with the Bureau of Ships
about the Comparator. Soon after the war the
bureau decided that it should be protected by
patents. Bush was sent all the necessary paper-
work to sign. He did so, but only after the deepest
protests tothe navy about revealing precious
secrets and about imposing upon him.®

(U) OP-20-G had lost another friend.
Stanford C. Hooper was in semiretirement. He
was now old and ill, and he had to spend much
time in Florida. He was acting asa consultant to
several small electronics firms, including ERA,
however. He still had the ear of many Washington
influentials, but he could nolonger aggressively
fight tolink OP-20-G, the scientific establish-
ment, and the large corporations. In fact, he had
become a bit soured on the corporations and aca-
demia. He had come to favor small private com-
panies asthe only guarantor of innovation and
responsiveness.

(U) Meanwhile, the other part of OP-20-G’s
old university-computer connection, Bush’s
“boys,” had migrated to the “captive” corporation,
ERA. Howard, Coombs, and Steinhardt were

Page 235
Page 236

“TOP SECRETHCOMINTIREL -USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIDH

keeping up with computer developments, but
ERA’s first contracts and the imperative to devel-
opa “cryptanalytic” machine kept them too busy
to act as computer innovators. Asa result, their
1945 general-purpose computer aspirations lan-
guished until mid-1946.

(U) Then, “G” developed a new and energetic
computer champion. At the same time, it found
someone with great enough scientific status to
validate its request to acquire something which,
inthe mid-1940s, seemed more fanciful than
Bush’s 1930s machine.

(VU) Goodbye Dr. Bush, Hello Professor von
Neumann

(U) Just as the Goldberg project was launched
in St. Paul and as Wenger’s own research group
was deciding whether or not to have someone
build anelectronic Super Bombe, one of “G's”
mathematicians, James T. Pendergrass, enrolled
in a summer institute on the programmable, dig-
ital electronic computer.’

(U) His inclusion in the Philadelphia meeting
was almost an afterthought. Apparently “G” had
not been asked to send someone until a few weeks
before the Moore School Lectures began.
Pendergrass had intended to spend much of the
summer on vacation, but when his boss, Howard
Campaigne, called him, he found it impossible to
refuse the assignment. Herushed _ tothe
University of Pennsylvania and immediately
began sending reports to Campaigne.

(U) Howard Campaigne was one ofthose
bright young men who had been brought into “G”
early inthe war. Like his friend, Joe Eachus, he
spent much time in England.® And like Eachus he
became deeply involved with the RAM program.
Deciding not to go to ERA, he became a civilian
scientist within “G.” He helped shape and direct
“G's” postwar research agenda. By 1946 he was
one of Joseph Wenger's right-hand men and was
respected enough to be allowed to act as a repre-

sentative of “G” tothe outside world. That was
what caused him to attend animportant Navy
Department conference in spring 1946.

(U) The conference was onthe nature of
large-scale computers. The major address was
given by the man who would soon equal or exceed
Vannevar Bush’s status in the scientific-political
realm, John von Neumann. ?

(U) John von Neumann was perhaps the most
famous ofthe new applied mathematicians. He
had migrated from Europe inthe 1930s to join
the likes of Albert Einstein at America’s only true
research institute, a place where scholars set their
own agendas. von Neumann became one of the
“scientifically anointed” atthe Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton.

(U) The first rumblings ofwar led the
Institute and von Neumann to move far beyond
their abstract academic origins. During World
War I, von Neumann made important contribu-
tions tothe atomic bomb project. Asa result of
that involvement, hebecame entangled inthe
ENIAC computer effort atthe University of
Pennsylvania.

(U) The University of Pennsylvania’s World
War IL contract with Army Ordnance for the
ENIAC had come almost by chance, just as the
NDRC ended its computer program, and as firms
such as RCA rejected pleas toturn their hard-
pressed engineers to computer projects.
Ordnance was in need ofa way to speed the cal-
culation of firing tables. With no other alterna-
tive, the army accepted the proposal of two young
engineers at the Moore School. They promised to
build anelectronic version of Bush’s great
Differential Analyser. Fortunately for the history
of computers, John Mauchly and Presper Eckert
were given agreat deal offreedom and time.
Their much delayed postwar delivery ofthe rela-
tively special-purpose ENIAC was not treated as a
sign of failure, and their plan for a programmable

FOR-GEGRETHCOMINFFREE-USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZLIXT
TOR SECRETICOMINTHREL-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBR AND NZEHAT—

universal electronic computer was quickly
funded.

(U) With the help of John von Neumann, they
started the project (EDVAC) and began seminars
that attracted the pre- and postwar generations of
computer builders." von Neumann’s stature in
the scientific and military communities had
grown so much that his presence gave the Moore
School’s computer efforts the highest credibility.
While working on the design of what is regarded
as the first true universal computer, the EDVAC,
the original leaders ofthe ENIAC project,
Mauchly and Eckert, had become estranged from
the university's administration and, to some
degree, from John von Neumann.

(U) Von Neumann, whose importance
increased in the postwar years, also became alien-
ated from the University of Pennsylvania. He
decided to found his own computer initiative. He
was soon able to convince his old academic home,
the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) at
Princeton, to accept several military and civilian
grants and to create a center to house his attempt
to design and build his own computer. His “IAS”
machine was intended toserve the needs of
applied mathematicians and physicists.

(U) Von Neumann did not confine himself to
computer building. He became a major figure in
Cold War science and policy. He advised all of the
American leaders of the era, and he served on the
most important science-related boards. He even
became a good friend of OP-20-G and later NSA,
serving ontheir expert panels. Hegave them
much technical and political advice throughout
the 1940s and 1950s. His contributions included
more than hints about new computer technolo-
gies. He frequently urged the SIGINT agencies to
sponsor fundamental electronic research to be
conducted by leading academics.”

(U) While von Neumann was forging his Cold
War reputation, the Moore School had begun its
own machine, the EDVAC. Sponsored by Army

TOP-SECRET/COMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZLIAT

Ordnance, EDVAC was to have the simplest of
architecture. Although it was intended tobe an
operational machine for the Aberdeen Proving
Grounds, it was also something ofa testbed. A
central goal of the project was to prove that a uni-
versal machine could be made to work and to do
it quickly. Therefore, EDVAC was designed as
simply as possible.

(U) EDVAC was abinary machine that
depended upon a serial acoustic delay-line mem-
ory. That memory was to hold both programs and
data. The acoustic technology limited the
machine to about 1,000 words of fast memory.
Technological limits also dictated much ofthe
EDVAC’s internal organization. Trying to avoid
the problems caused bythe high failure rate of
vacuum tubes, EDVAC’s internal structure was
made as sparse as possible. It had just one-third
the number of tubes used in the ENIAC.

(U) To keep the number of components at an
absolute minimum, the machine had only a few
built-in instructions. That was a wise decision.
Each “instruction” demanded dozens of tubes
and hundreds of handwired connections. And
each increased the computer’s cost and multi-
plied the probability that it would experience a
failure well before any significant computational
task could be completed.

(U) In addition tokeeping the number of
components toa minimum, EDVAC’s designers
limited the machine tothe serial transmission
and processing of data (one bit at a time). Serial
processing also reduced the amount of failure-
prone electronics. But it carried the price of slow-
er processing rates.

(U) EDVAC’s designers made another trade-
off that favored simplicity over speed. The
machine’s operations were based on “fixed clock”
timing. That meant that no matter how little time
one operation took, succeeding work had to wait
until the next clock pulse.

Page 237
FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTTREL-UGAUS,-GAN-GBRANE-NZEH—

(U) EDVAC’s planners tried to keep their task
manageable byconcentrating onbuilding a
machine for mathematicians. EDVAC was not
intended tobe adata processor. The EDVAC
engineers did not try to solve the many problems
involved in making input and output rates
approach electronic speeds. Slow tape and card
readers gave the machine its data, and its even
more primal cardpunches and _teletypewriters
displayed results. Although one of the first com-
puter programs written by the ENIAC-EDVAC
group was for sorting, EDVAC’s builders never
pretended that it could replace tabulator equip-
ment.

(U) While the EDVAC’s designs were being
set, the ENIAC’s parents, Eckert and Mauchly,
left the University of Pennsylvania and attempted
to found and keep afloat their own for-profit com-
puter company. After more than six years of anx-
iety and tragedy, they completed the UNIVAC
computer.

(U) The UNIVAC was also a delay-line, fixed-
clock machine, but it went far beyond the EDVAC
in terms of power and sophistication. One reason
for that was the UNIVAC’s attempt to become
“the” new business machine, one to replace hun-
dreds oftabulators. That called fcr the develop-
ment of much-enhanced I/O technology. Anew
data processing capability was tosome extent
achieved through the creation of magnetic tape
systems, adevelopment that helps explain why
the first UNIVAC did not appear until 1951.

(U) The goal of building a computer to replace
the tabulators led toa very historic decision by
Eckert and Mauchly. Because they wanted to
maximize the speed of data processing, which
typically demanded little calculation ona great
deal of information, they deviated from a purely
binary representation of numbers within the
UNIVAC. It had what was called atthe time a
“decimal” representation. Although UNIVAC
used binary circuits, adecimal format was
imposed to speed the input-output functions.

(U) Eckert and Mauchly’s commercial com-
puter aspirations, as well as John von Neumann’s
academic ones, were just emerging when the
University of Pennsylvania decided to host its his-
toric summer 1946 Moore School conference. All
those who had made contributions to computing
during the war were invited to hear presentations
by von Neumann and others who were outlining
the computers of the future.

(U) ASummer in Philadelphia — an Exciting
One

(U) Itwas probably Howard Campaigne’s
attendance at an earlier (May) navy symposium
that made him aware of the Moore School confer-
ence. The Washington meeting was where he first
made contact with von Neumann and where he
realized that the general-purpose computer was
going tobe built, with or without OP-20-G.
Campaigne decided that “G” should at least have
a chance to be one of its sponsors.

(U) He hurriedly arranged for some funds and
then called his assistant, James Pendergrass, ask-
ing him to attend the coming Philadelphia sym-
posium. Campaigne was unable to tell him much
about what was to take place in Philadelphia. As a
result, much of what Pendergrass encountered
surprised as well as thrilled him.

(U) During the Moore School’s summer pro-
gram, Pendergrass studied the designs ofthe
ENIAC and those for the much more advanced
EDVAC. He listened tothe presentations of the
other men who had begun to develop universal
electronic machines.

(U) Coming from a physical sciences back-
ground and being an advocate for applied mathe-
matics, Pendergrass was especially taken with
John von Neumann’s ideas, including his version
of a programming language. When von Neumann
outlined the concept for his new Institute for
Advanced Study machine, Pendergrass became
convinced that “G” had to have avon Neumann

FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-USAAUS-CAN- GBR ANE-NZEIE

Page 238
ee Se, ed

Be cule sari igh bs a '

ae)

ner sinh innithmtomn a: a eee

 

(U) UNIVA C

type of computer. He thought the von Neumann
design was the best, the one that would be the
first to appear in hardware, and the one most
likely to be cloned by a manufacturer. Well before
the Philadelphia conference was concluded,
Pendergrass convinced Howard Campaigne that
OP-20-G should have one ofthe “new” comput-
ers, specifically one with avon Neumann archi-
tecture.

(U) Pendergrass was not the only one who
believed in the LAS design. The mathematical and
applied physics community took it as the model
for computers for the 1940s and early 1950s. The
emerging von Neumann architecture was espe-
cially attractive to mathematicians because it
promised to provide a much faster and more pre-
cise computer than other designs ofthe era. It
had the potential to be faster than the serial type
of machines by factors inthe hundreds. At least
five IAS computers were copied in American uni-
versities and advanced research centers.

(U) The IAS machine was not going to send or
process data bit by bit, nor was it going to make
one operation wait for a “clock.” It was going to
send data simultaneously and would initiate an

FEP-GEGREHIGOMINFTHREL-UGA-AUE-GAN-GBROAND-NZE—

operation as soon as the previous one finished. As
or more important, it was not going to be based
on the limited delay-line memory. von Neumann
bet that RCA would keep to its pledge and devel-
op the very advanced Selectron tube within a few
months. The Selectron promised tobe a fast

memory that would maximize the potentials of
electronic speed and parallel data-transmission
and processing.

(U) To many in the computer field, however,
von Neumann seemed too far ahead of the tech-
nology. He also appeared to be naive about how
much of the complexity of his proposed machine
could be mastered by his handful of engineers.
His critics thought the EDVAC group was taking
amore sensible course: creating a minimal and
reliable computer that had a possibility of being
completed on time.

(U) Given the ambitious nature of
von Neumann’s computer, Pendergrass and
Campaigne sensed that it was not going to be easy
to persuade “G” that scarce resources should be
devoted toa machine that was not yet fully
designed, let alone built. No one, in fact, could

Page 239
Page 240

—FOR-SEGRETICOMINFHREL-UGA AUS -CAN-GBR-ANE-NELHMT

predict when any of the new computers would be
completed.

(U) Despite von Neumann’s reputation and
the accolades that the atomic energy community
was awarding to the IAS design, Pendergrass and
Campaigne knew they would have to prove that
“a” machine could compete with all the special-
purpose devices that were in place at “G” as well
as those that were being planned. And they would
have to show, without insulting anyone, that the
new computer would be as good as or better than
Goldberg, the perhaps-universal comparator.
Pendergrass and Campaigne were ina situation
quite analogous to Hooper’s inthe early 1930s:
How could they convince “operational” types that
scientists had a better and practical grasp of the
future?

CFS) Pendergrass got to work during the sum-
mer and continued on, with Howard Campaigne’s
enthusiastic help, through the remainder of the
year. They composed two persuasive technical
reports.”

€F3) The first was sent to “G’s” higher-ups in
October, the second in December. A great deal of
effort had gone into both reports to ensure they
would convince the cryptanalysts that, like the
proposed Sled, the von Neumann machine would
end the horror of having to wait two years while a
requested special machine was constructed. *? The
reports did not refer to any particular experience,
but Pendergrass knew that many in his audience
had gone through the frustrations of World War
If when almost all the RAMs (and the Bombes)
had arrived too late.

€55 Inone ofthe classic statements in the
history of computers, Pendergrass wrote: “It is
not meant that acomputer would replace all the
machines in Building #4, nor isit meant that it
could perform all the problems as fast as the
existing special purpose machines. It is however,
the author's contention that a computer could do
everything that any analytic machine in Building

#4 can, and doa good percentage of these prob-
lems more rapidly.”“4

(FS) The text ofthe report reflected both
Pendergrass’ orientation and the nature of mid-
1940s computers. After explaining the logic of the
von Neumann machine and admitting that it
might be some time before any such computer
would be available, he outlined what he thought
was to be a standard programming language, one
based onvon Neumann’s “one address” con-
cept.®

(U) Von Neumann envisioned a machine that
would be used for very precise calculation and lit-
tle data processing. To speed calculating, it was to
bea pure binary machine. To further improve
performance, he had turned away from the origi-
nal EDVAC idea of a four-address instruction. He
had come tobelieve that the most efficient
instruction format should include only one place
to get or put data. That would allow, given the
word size of the computer, more precise calcula-
tions without additional hardware.

(U) Heargued that because his machine
would be busy with much internal work, such as
multiplication and division, it would be more effi-
cient to have “get” and “place” addresses in sepa-
rate statements. Only ifa computer was to be
used for much I/O and little calculation would a
multi-address instruction be reasonable.

(U) Von Neumann also believed that his
machine should have very few commands. The
smaller the number of commands, the less inter-
nal circuitry that would be needed. Following his
mandates, his engineers were able to reduce the
number of components inthe IAS machine. It
had only two-thirds the number of tubes of the
EDVAC. Von Neumann’s mathematical focus also
meant that hegave little thought tothe I/O
problem. What happened within the computer
was more important to him than handling mass-
es of data.

FORSECRETICOMINTIREL USA-AUS.CAN GBR AND. MEL/XI...
“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USA_AUS,CAN GBR AND NZEIAT—

P3778 Pendergrass agreed with all of von
Neumann’s ideas, but in his reports he suggested
that afew additions be made to von Neumann’s
set of minimal instructions. They were to be ones
which, like multiplication and mod 2 commands,
would be needed to meet special cryptanalytic
needs. Especially important tohim were those
which would speed the analysis of baudot traffic.

€8) The politically important parts of the
Pendergrass reports were the sections in which he
and Campaigne presented computer programs
for major cryptanalytic attacks. Demonstrating
how the machine would perform the attacks was
critical if “G” was to be persuaded to invest ina
computer. Ofcourse, the reports reflected an
implicit faith that programming would be much,
much less ofa problem than building a special-
purpose machine. No mention was made of how
long it took to write the programs.

(484/8)) The first report included software
programs for a Generalized Copperhead problem,
a Four-Wheel Enigma Grenade Problem, and
a Hagelin attack. The December report was
intended toimpress any holdouts. It contained
programs toimitate two ofthe grand achieve-
ments of World War I,the Duenna and the
Mercury. Asa concluding argument, the report
showed how to end the great crypto-disappoint-
ments of the war years. There was a program that
could imitate acipher wheel. It showed that a
general-purpose computer might act as an elec-
tronic Super Bombe.’®

(U) Buy a Computer, Now

¢§ The reports made their point, at least with
farsighted men like Joseph Wenger. He took
action even before the Pendergrass-Campaigne
report of December was completed. To reinforce
Pendergrass’ arguments, he immediately
arranged for ERA’s John Howard to conduct a
computer feasibility study and assigned
Pendergrass to continue to survey the computer
field.

—FOP-GEGRETICOMINHREL-UGA- AUG —GAN-GBR-AND-NZEE

(U) Pendergrass did not waste time. In
November he informed “G” that many military
and some civilian agencies were very interested in
digital computers and that projects atthe
National Bureau of Standards and RCA (with the
IAS) stood a good chance of producing machines
by 1948. The TAS-RCA project, he thought, had
the best design and best chance of success. *”

(U) After attending another major computer
conclave at Harvard in January, Pendergrass for-
warded anew survey of America’s and Britain’s
computer ambitions. He cited the emergence of
more computer projects, most of which were sup-
ported by government agencies. The navy’s
Bureau of Ordnance and the ONR, he showed,
had already established quite a foothold, as had
Army Ordnance. Even the Census Bureau had
become involved.*® Among the six active proj-
ects’? (the one under John V. Atanasoff had just
been cancelled bythe Naval Ordnance
Laboratory), the IAS computer, Pendergrass
reported, continued tobe the best option. It
remained much closer tocompletion than the
proposed Whirlwind at MIT, and itwas more
suited to cryptanalytic work than the upcoming
UNIVAC or the EDVAC.

(U) The only nonpositive things that
Pendergrass had tosay about the Princeton
efforts were that he had discovered that RCA and
Princeton did not have a formal agreement bind-
ing the corporation to build a computer and that
its valuable Selectron was still in the “uncertain”
category. Neither seemed critical to Pendergrass,
however. He expected a working IAS machine by
mid-1948. He assured “G” that ifthe Selectron
were not perfected, an electrostatic memory, such
asthe one proposed by MIT’s Jay Forrester,
would serve as a fully acceptable substitute.

€S) Pendergrass’ surveys were read by
Howard Campaigne, then sent to Joseph Wenger.
Wenger trusted Pendergrass, and he believed that
OP-20-G should gain afoothold in computers
before one ofthe other branches ofthe navy

Page 241
Page 242

—~FOP-SECRETHEOMINTHREL-UGAAUS-CAN-GHIC AND NED

established amonopoly. Without waiting for
John Howard and C. B. Tompkins to submit their
ERA report (it arrived in February 1947), Wenger
made acommitment to acquire avon Neumann
type of computer. 7°

(¥8778D Even before a contract was let, plans
were laid to use the new machine on major oper-
ational problems.” “G” even put aside the idea of
building an electronic Super Bombe, at least until
the potentials of the new universal computer were
explored.

(U) InJanuary Wenger was so enthusiastic
that he ordered his men toestablish project
“Atlas,” although he did not yet have the funds to
design and acquire amachine. ** The name
“Atlas” was picked because a comic strip used it
as a name for a “mental giant,” but a reference to
raw courage would have been as appropriate.
Wenger still had to gain formal approval for the
“G” computer.

(S} As Wenger struggled to find the money he
needed, additional crypto-studies reinforced the
initial enthusiasm, and went beyond it, perhaps
raising expectation abit too high: “This opens
tremendous possibilities inthe field of clinical
attack by speeding this attack upto the point
where large volumes oftraffic may beso
processed. With sufficient skill in preparing the
logical control, it seems possible that the machine
may be made to perform any cryptanalytic opera-
tion now done by hand, which does not require
intuition.” "3

(S} Wenger did everything he could to make
sure the “G” computer proposal would be. funded.
He had Pendergrass assigned asa liaison to the
Office of Naval Research. It was exploring com-
puters and was intensely committed to furthering
applied mathematics. With Pendergrass in touch
with ONR’s experts, they would be unlikely to
block the “G” request on technical grounds. Other
mathematicians inthe agency were sent to
important computer seminars: Eachus,

Campaigne, Blois, Tordella, and others met with
the “greats” of computer history, such as Alan
Turing and M. V. Wilkes.

3} The contacts and investigations soon
started to pay off. “G” was gaining a reputation as
one of “the” centers of computer expertise. Other
development projects, such as Whirlwind at MIT,
gladly shared design information.

(U) At least in terms of computer architecture,
“G” was well integrated with high science. “G”
became committed tothe atomic scientists’
favored way of sending data within the machine:
all the bits at one time in parallel, rather than one
bit at a time (serial mode) asin the EDVAC. As
important, “G” wanted Atlas to have a single
memory, one to hold both data and instructions.
That was in contrast to some architecture, such as
those of Howard Aiken at Harvard, who thought
separate memories, concurrent processing, and
dozens of registers made for amore powerful
computer.™* Without any hesitation, “G” favored
apure binary system for its computer. The idea
that became embodied in the UNIVAC, that some
decimal representation was more efficient was
rejected.

(U) While his research crew defined Atlas,
Wenger worked on the politics of acquisition. He
convinced the CNO of the need for Atlas, gained
an extremely high priority rating for it,*5 and then
sidestepped some serious objections from the
Bureau of Ships.

(U) Inresponse to hints there were already
enough navy computer efforts and that long term
research should beleft toothers, Wenger
informed the bureau that “G” needed to acquire a
“special analytical machine.” The word “special”
gave OP-20-G the opening it needed to avoid a
worst-case situation in which it would be forced
to wait for and accept amachine it might not
want. It also gave “G” the chance to play a positive
role in the emergence of the computer industry. *°

FOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GER AND NZUIRT
FOR-SEGRETIGCOMHFHREL USA AUSCAN GBR AND RZDIAT

(U) Well before authorization had been grant-
ed, “G” began amore detailed design and made
evaluations of possible computer manufacturers.
With all the other government agencies sponsor-
ing research inthe field and with the interest
shown byseveral private companies, “G's”
experts did not anticipate that a large investment
would be required for the design or for the hard-
ware. “G” still thought RCA would enter the mar-
ket. The National Bureau of Standards also
seemed ready tobuild acomputer. Wenger
expected to have Atlas atthe Nebraska Avenue
complex in approximately two years.””

(U) Whatever the options, Wenger wanted
quick action. Even though a “special” machine
had been approved and although Monogram
funds were available, there was always the chance
that the White House might decide that comput-
ers were aluxury. Even the $100,000 to
$300,000 for the machine might be seen as too
much for a peacetime intelligence agency.”*

(U) Laying out the general specifications for
Atlas was relatively painless. Pendergrass had
done his technical homework, and his recom-
mendations were only refined, not changed.
Beginning in March 1947, when “G” decided to
take more responsibility for designing its Atlas,
Campaigne, Eachus, Pendergrass and many oth-
ers at “G” began to meet to detail the functional
characteristics oftheir newest “analytical
machine.” They even began to write programs.
The enthusiasm was so great that many worked
nights and weekends on their problems. *?

~<S “G” was to have a von Neumann comput-
er, not asouped-up version ofits older devices.
Suggestions that Pendergrass’ original sketches
be altered by adding special-purpose attachments
were adamantly rejected, as were those recom-
mendations that the machine have control
switches and plugboards. Software, driving ele-
mental circuits, was to be the only control mech-
anism.?°

—FEP-SEGRETHIGCOMINFHREL-UGA-AUG-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEH—

EO 3.3(h)(2)

P.L. 86-36

(S} But the number of commands built into
the machine was tobe expanded beyond von
Neumann’s original list, and Pendergrass’ early
recommendations. By1947 close to forty .com-
mands were inthe design. The expansion was
aimed at easing cryptanalytic processing, ag had
been the alteration in the fundamental word size
in the machine to six digits. That would allow let-
ters as well as numbers to be analyzed. :

(S$) The additional commands were at the fun-
damental level of the machine. There were ‘no
suggestions that complex sequences to imitate
entire processes be wired into Atlas. A series of
multiplication commands and a divide instrue-
tion were included, however, as were shift com-
mands and noncarry arithmetic capabilities,
Shifts were especially useful when rotor or wheel
stepping was required,

Also, there were hopes that arandom number
generator could be devised.

 

(U) Campaigne, Eachus, and the others on the
design team had bright hopes for Atlas. But there
were limits to the aspirations. They accepted the
fate that plagued the first computer generation:
They did not attempt towrite acompiler ora
high-level language for the machine. The only
treat the “G” group gave programmers was the
luxury of writing in octal rather than binary nota-
tion. That provided some relief, but itdid not
allow a programmer to avoid specifying the loca-
tion of memory addresses in “absolute” terms.
There was no software to automatically keep
track ofwhere instructions or variables were
located.

(U) Like the TAS computer, Atlas was to be
centered about what the Princeton group consid-
ered “the” solution to the memory problem, the
RCA Selectron tube. It would allow an electronic-
speed mass memory, something needed to meet
the potential of parallel data transmission and
processing. Hopefully, the Selectrons would sup-
port a large memory. In 1990s terms, Atlas was to
have 64K. In terms of the longer word size of the

Page 243
Page 244

“TOP-SECRETHICOMINTHREL-USA:-AUS-CAN-GBR-ANB-NZLAG—

Atlas, that was equal to 16,384 “cells.” That was
orders greater than what was planned for
EDVAC.**

(U) The Selectron was under development at
RCA’s research laboratory. Rachman’s tube
promised tobe much more powerful than the
other types of binary electrostatic storage devices
that were under development. And it was expect-
ed momentarily. Although some at OP-20-G had
treated many of Rachman’s ideas as more than
fanciful, because of his advanced work during the
war, he had become an ally of von Neumann, and
his work demanded respect.*”

(U) The Selectron was a complex device, but it
had agreat advantage; it was small and fast. Its
size was one of its great attractions because other
high-speed memories of the period, such as delay
lines orthe Wilkes electrostatic tube,** took a
great amount ofspace. Unfortunately, the
Selectron proved to be too complex.

(U) It was based upon the principle that “an
insulated secondary-electron emitter can be
made to ‘float’ at either of two stable positions...”
Deceptively simple, the principle demanded
much delicate hardware. Inside the three-by-
seven-inch tubes was a dielectric target that was
divided up by sixty-four metal bars and sixty-five
circular metal rings. They created 4,096 “cells”
that were the storage areas. When the four walls
of a cell were all more positive than some partic-
ular voltage, a “bit” was registered.

(U) To von Neumann’s and “G’s” great disap-
pointment, all that was too much, even for the
great Jan Rachman.* By spring 1947 RCA had to
admit that it might besome time before the
Selectron was ready. That led to some technolog-
ical soul searching in Princeton and Washington.
The IAS put more effort into a television-like elec-
trostatic memory and even explored the possibil-
ity of ultra-high-speed secondary memory based
on magnetic wire wound on bicycle wheel drives.

(U) The news about the Selectron was only
one indication that the computer revolution was
going to take much longer than had been thought.
RCA began to make itclear that it was pulling
back from its hints of becoming a manufacturer,
the National Bureau of Standards program had
slowed to a crawl, and the probability that the ex-
ENIAC team, Eckert and Mauchly, could deliver
their promised computer to the Census Bureau in
time for the 1950 census sank to near zero.

(U) By spring 1947 Atlas was on its own. If “G”
were to have its computer, it would have to take
even more responsibility, perhaps even for a very
expensive failure. And it would have to make a
critical technological choice.

(UV) Little Thanks for That Memory

(U) In April 1947, after learning about the
faltering industrial commitments and_ the
Selectron’s possible stillbirth, “G” made two very
significant decisions. The first was to continue
with the project and the acquisition of a comput-
er despite the absence of an “industry” or even a
university that seemed willing to build comput-
ers. The second decision was perhaps more dra-
matic.

€FS77SD When itwas learned that the
Selectron would not be available, there was a crit~
ical meeting at “G’s” Nebraska Avenue headquar-
ters. Some ofthose inattendance thought that
without the high-speed memory it would be
senseless tocontinue more than very general
design work. What use would Atlas’ electronic cir-
cuits be if the memory was a slow tape or similar
device? Even looking for a manufacturer for Atlas
did not make sense tothem. There were a few
suggestions that the entire project be put on hold.

(48//St) Howard Campaigne, perhaps wor-
ried that such adecision would end chances of
funding, put up a stubborn fight. He won half his
battle: The work was not canceled. But his victo-
ry seemed to open the door tosome dangerous

—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINFHREL-HSA-AUS-CAN-GBRANE-NZEA1
“TOP-SECRETHCOMIN TREC -USA_AUS-EAN-GBRAND-NZEH—

possibilities. His recommendation to go with
what had always been the “fall back” memory for
Atlas and Goldberg,*° a magnetic drum, stood the
chance of making Atlas and “G” look rather fool-
ish. It could make Atlas very slow and perhaps
very dumb.

€5//8B Drums were much faster than tapes
or cards, but they delivered information ata rate
of 1/4ooth or less of delay lines. Some estimates
of the period gave the Selectron and electrostatic
memories a 1,000-fold advantage.®’ If microfilm
could have been made to be “rewritable,” it could
also have made a drum look antiquated. Seventy-
millimeter microfilm held 12,000 bits per inch;
drums had a density of from 100 to 200 bits.**

BS) Although “G’s” RAM group realized that
such a memory would slow the proposed machine
manyfold, bya close vote its members decided
that adrum would be acceptable. Itseemed a
much better choice than postponing the project
and being left dependent onthe whims ofan
almost nonexistent computer industry.

48) Campaigne and his associates realized
they were taking achance. There were hosts of
mechanical as well as magnetic-electronic chal-
lenges to overcome. Whether the “drums” were
long bars orthree-foot “wheels” covered with
magnetic tape or sprayed with a magnetic coat-
ing, the problems of milling, sensing heads, and
drive motors remained unsolved. Even ERA, with
ahead start on drum construction because of its
connection tothe earlier RAM projects, did not
have a finished and sure technology in hand. *?

4S} “G” decided to take the risk. While the
IAS group waited for the Selectron’s development
or the appearance of another electrostatic memo-
ry, “G” started to work on revised designs for a
drum machine. It also began a search for some-
one to build the newly defined Atlas.*°

(#8) No serious consideration seems to have
been given to having, as would many atomic ener-

TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-USA-AUS-CAN-GER ANB NZL —

gyresearch groups, auniversity take charge of
final design and manufacture. And “G” did not
spend much time investigating the few compa-
nies that seemed willing to build computers.
Thus, soon after the critical April 1947 meeting,
ERA was chosen even though “G” knew how busy
the young firm was with its first contracts.

€§) There was some worry that Atlas might be
abit too much for the new company and that
some emerging problems with magnetic drums
might not be conquered. “ But in August 1947
ERA was given adesign contract. And it was
informed that “G” wanted a machine soon. ERA
was not to wait for the results ofthe several
research projects OP-20-G and the SIS were
sponsoring todevelop multifunction and ultra-
high-speed tubes and new circuits. And there was
no thought of deiaying Atlas just because there
were not yet any high-speed printers suitable for
an electronic computer. **

(EX) There were a growing number of reasons
why “G” wanted ERA to quickly prove the worth
ofa universal machine for cryptanalysis. Just as
ERA was put to work onthe final designs, the
Sled project with its special architecture was
being launched with much support from the
Bureau of Ships. In addition to having some com-
petition, Atlas had to face another possible trau-
ma; there were well-grounded rumors that the
Monogram budget was to be cut severely so.”

€FS) With agreat deal ofhelp from “G's”
research group in Washington, ERA was able
todevelop anacceptable design within a
few months. Asrequested, it matched the
von Neumann concepts and was aimed at avoid-
ing manufacturing problems. Some rather useful
ideas were sacrificed to the needs of the produc-
tion schedule. Asecond processor, which would
check results, was not included, and the sugges-
tion todevelop a partitioned memory was
dropped. Having as many as eight active “accu-
mulators” was also regarded astoo much ofa
luxury.

Page 245
Page 246

“TOPSECRETHCOMINTHREL-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLUX 4

FS) In early spring 1948, in return for prom-
ises to use as much standard equipment as possi-
ble, ERA was awarded aconstruction contract.
There was a caveat, however. ERA was more than
encouraged to build Atlas ina way that would
allow the substitution of electrostatic (Selectron)
storage if and when it became available.

CFS//85H) ERA and “G” were ina hurry. Atlas
was given an AA priority, ERA borrowed much
from MIT’s Whirlwind project, and ERA gave
Atlas as much attention as possible even when it
had torush tocomplete some special-purpose
machines to attack Russian targets.*+

€S} While the engineers in St. Paul were work-

ing on Atlas, the mathematicians-turned-pro-
grammers in Washington built their own com-
puter to prepare for Atlas’ arrival. They wanted
programs ready tohelp prove their electronic
computer’s operational value assoon as it was
_ delivered. Constructed within four months out of
relays and asmall magnetic drum developed by
ERA, their Abel computer was a logical clone of

Atlas. It gave “G” more than a year’s head start in
training programmers and in writing some oper-
ational programs. Its drum was not large enough
to perform all of Atlas’ chores, and its relays were
hundreds of times slower than ERA’s circuits, but
itcame tobe almost a“pet” ofthe research
group.

(G) Meanwhile, despite the growing pressures
on ERA, it was able to work something of a com-
puter miracle: Atlas was delivered to the navy in
early December 1950, fairly close to the anticipat-
ed delivery date. It had taken ERA less than two
years to construct the machine, perhaps because
so much time had been spent preparing for its
production stage and because of ERA’s experi-
ence building special-purpose machines, such as
Goldberg. In fact, Atlas was the thirteenth project
for*G?”

(€7 Most ofthe design goals were accom-
plished. That made Atlas one ofthe very first
operational computers inthe world. ERA also
achieved another sort of computer first: Atlas

worked and worked well for

 

 

1 et reese OF tr
> {

a decade after it was sent to
Washington. Avery effi-
cient testing and mainte-
nance schedule allowed
replacement of tubes before
they caused an unexpected
failure. That contributed to
analmost unheard of 90
percent “up-time” (avail-
ability), which made ERA
very proud and very anx-
ious totransfer its new
computer skills to the com-
mercial marketplace. *” It
was also proud that it could
have built one ofthe most
powerful ofall the early
computers using only 2,700
tubes and that its drum per-
formed reliably.** Asa

result, ERA and its follow-

—TFOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USA-AUS,-CAN-GBRAND-NZEH——
“TOP SECRE IICOMINTIREL USA: AUS, CAN-OBR-AND-NZLHM4

on companies became leaders in magnetic drum
technology and gained a reputation as supercom-
puter builders.

(U) Saving a Reputation through Logic

FS) But all the original Atlas goals were not
attained. The machine had cost perhaps three
times the early postwar estimate; its delivery
price was just short of $1,000,000. *? More
importantly, the drum held less than one-third
the amount of information that had been hoped
for in1947. But ERA was able to rotate it at an
extremely high speed. Partly by reducing its size
from the dimensions of earlier drums (three feet
in diameter) to twenty-five inches long and eight
inches in diameter, Atlas’ drum was ten times as
fast asthe one installed on Goldberg. °° The
increased speed helped, but it did not solve the
memory access problem. The 1950 Atlas began its
life as a very slow machine because the program,
as well as data, had tobe read from the drum.
There did not seem to be a viable technical save.
Replacing the drum with the still expensive and
irritable electrostatic or delay-line memories
seemed impractical.

“€ES) The programmers at OP-20-G were
charged with finding the best solution they could.
Perhaps to everyone’s surprise, they came up with
an answer that made Atlas competitive with other
computers of the time.

¢€> The solution they devised was called
“interlacing.” Combined with very careful pro-
gramming, it increased Atlas’ speed by a factor of
more than 300. That meant that the drum-based
Atlas became approximately two-thirds as fast as
asimilar machine using the new magnetic core
memory ofthe mid-1950s. In fact, Atlas came
close to being a match for the IAS machine.** The
increase in Atlas’ speed came at a high cost to the
early programmers, however.

(S}.The trick they had to pull off was to place
instructions around the drum insuch an order

-TFOR-GEGRETH/COMNTHREL-UEA-AUE-CAN-GER-ANB-NELHE

EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L. 86-36

that rotation time until the next expected instruc-
tion was minimized. At first, aplugboard was
used to accomplish the necessary scrambling of
once-sequential locations. By 1951 an automatic
“dial” system was installed that eliminated the
need toreplug aboard for each program.
Although the relocation of instructions was made
automatic, programming was not. To utilize the
“interlaced” instruction, programs had to be

drafted on large sheets of paper. The two-by-
three-foot sheets allowed the programmers to
keep track of where the instructions were located
and allowed them to perform timing miracles so
that the call for the instruction came when the
drum was in the correct positions.™

(#8}-Despite the near agony of Atlas program-
ming, a wide range of statistical attacks was run
onthe machine. It proved Pendergrass’ point
about flexibility although writing Atlas’ pro-
grams, took much, much longer than had been
imagined byhim in 1946. Such fondly remem-
bered programs as Bootstraps for the identifica-
tion of nonrandom distributions (roughness test-

ing) and[ SCS analysis’ aids: took

enormous human effort.>?

(U) The new programmers in Washington
could not find any way to compensate for anoth-
er of Atlas’ failings, however. Atlas could not be
coaxed into becoming a data processing comput-
er. Its input-output capabilities were too limited.
It brought data to its drum through a photoelec-
tric papertape reader; an Electromatic typewriter
and atape punch handled its output. There were
no pathways for punch card machines nor for the
just emerging magnetic tape drives.

CFS) Asevere limitation with many ramifica-
tions was Atlas’ inability to put the input tape-
reader under program control. All the reader
could do was load the drum. The paper tapes
could not be used as a dynamic source of data.

€S} Atlas’ sparse I/O was a result of conscious
design judgments, ones which mixed technologi-

Page 247
Page 248

—FOP-GEGRETICOMINTHREL-USA-AUS-CAN-CBR-AND-NZLINT—

cal possibilities with operational needs and with a
strong dose of “GM’s” goal of fulfilling Wenger's
dream of “mathematical” cryptanalysis.

(&} When Atlas was being designed, the only
new large-scale secondary memory media that
seemed tohave input potential was magnetic
tape. But tape systems with the possibility of
holding massive amounts of information
remained inthe development stage and were
proving very stubborn. To wait for their matura-
tion would have delayed Atlas’ construction; to
attempt to anticipate what circuitry Atlas needed
to hook upto future systems would have been
foolish.

&$) Attaching Atlas toan IBM card reader
might have seemed attractive atone point, but
there may have been questions about using that
company’s equipment in a competitor’s system.

tS} In any case, “G” had decided by 1948 that
energies would goto increasing Atlas’ internal
processing power by adding additional “instruc-
tion” circuits. The expansion ofthe number of
hardwired instructions was intended to encour-
age the use of “mathematical”cryptanalysis. The
many binary multiplication and shifting instruc-
tions and the divide circuitry made Atlas more
expensive and harder to manufacture, but they
speeded statistical testing by many factors.

(S-Those features seemed so attractive that
despite the severe I/O limitations, a second Atlas
was ordered some six months before the first was
shipped from St. Paul. Because the initial model
absorbed the development cost, this Atlas was
priced at one-third ofthe original. Atthe same
time, a new design cycle was begun. The Atlas II,
which in its civilian guise was called the 1103, was
the machine that anchored the ERA group’s com-
puter building reputation, although its original
price was $1,250,000."

(£8//89D For atime, however, it was thought
that Atlas III would be a data processor as well as

a “number cruncher.” But Atlas II could not over-
come the earlier I/O limitations. When it was
being designed, the Raytheon Company
announced it was perfecting tape drives. ERA’s
engineers built a program-controlled I/O feature
into the machine only to discover serious techni-
cal difficulties with the Raytheon magnetic tape
systems. Despite a last-minute effort, eleven were
delivered without atape capability.>° But its
internal processing powers were much enhanced.
Some electrostatic storage was added, the drum
was improved, atwo-address logic was intro-
duced, the word size was increased, and several
very useful basic instructions were added.

(U) All in all, “G” thought that its sometimes
frustrating computer adventure had been worth-
while. The agency’s advocates for general-pur-
pose machines had made their point, and the
work on Atlas helped to establish ERA as a com-
puter company. The Atlas designs and designers
would play animportant part inthe history of
automation of communications intelligence.

(U) The relatively happy ending ofthe Atlas
project was not quite matched inthe army’s
attempts toestablish its place inthe computer
world.

(U) The Army’s Problem

46) The SIS lost many ofits engineers after
the war, and it was unable to create its own ERA.
Inresponse, it planned todo some machine
design in-house, go to contractors for details and
components, and, when necessary, assemble its
secret special-purpose devices itself. That seemed
quite efficient, but the SIS was unable to follow
that approach when it began its quest for its first
general-purpose computer, amachine that took
its name from another newspaper cartoon char-
acter, “Abner.” Although some have claimed the
name was chosen because the modern computer
without a program isa dumb machine, the selec-
tion of the name in 1949 may have been inspired
bythe nature ofthe search for adesign and a

“TOPSECRETICOMINTH REL USA AUS CAN-OBR AND HeLa —
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZLIAT-

manufacturer. The army’s codebreakers had gone
through abizarre and agonizing odyssey during
the previous three years. The experience was
almost cosmic.*”

(S$ In 1945 there was a significant reduction
in force at the SIS. But Solomon Kullback and Leo
Rosen were able to retain enough personnel and
funds to continue the old “F” branch — one with a
fresh bureaucratic name and expanded powers.®
One oftheir first and most important decisions
was toappoint one oftheir young proteges to
head anew subsection. In January 1946 Samuel
S. Snyder, who later became a major figure in the
computer and information world, was asked to
survey the wartime computer developments and
then to turn his new RAM research group into a
dynamic force. The group was to keep the agency
informed about all the computer developments in
the world and to act asan advocate for further
automation within the agency.

(© Snyder and his coworkers, Mary Roseboro
and William May, began by gathering and rewrit-
ing all the documentation that remained on the
World War II machines at SIS. Soon they decided
to expand the survey to include the devices OP-

 

EE —————

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(U) Samel $, Snycer

TOP SECRETICOMINTTREL USA, AUS, CAN- GBR AND NZL

20-G had obtained. That turned their project into
creating what became the irreplaceable “Machine
Aids to Cryptanalysis” series.>?

<7 Snyder did more than follow in-house
developments. By mid-1947 hehad visited the
National Bureau of Standards and had made
some contacts with those in academia and the
commercial sector that had interests in computer
development. But he got somewhat ofa late start
at his attempts to bring a computer to the agency.

(S{/SD- The SIS was atleast ayear or two
behind OP-20-G’s computer work. One reason
was that someone like Snyder had not been
selected to attend the Philadelphia computer
symposium in mid-1946 that had so impressed
Pendergrass. Instead, Kullback had sent aSIS
engineer who had little orno mathematical or
cryptanalytic experience. The man was not
impressed with what he heard and did not report
back tothe SIS that agreat technological
and cryptanalytic opportunity had appeared.
According to Snyder, the man did not even sub-
mit a report on the ENIAC and EDVAC designs.”

(S77S1) Fortunately for the agency, Sam
Snyder encountered Pendergrass’ report.
Inspired, he began contacting others who were
developing what later became known as “comput-
er science.” Snyder became somewhat of a com-
puter “trekkie.” He attended all the meetings,
such as the famous one at the Aberdeen Proving
Grounds, of the just forming Eastern Association
for Computing Machinery.“ He learned of the
vast data processing center atthe Prudential
Insurance Company (some 700 IBM machines)
and the plans of one of its aggressive young exec-
utives to make the Prudential acenter for elec-
tronic computer development and applications.
That contact with E.C. Berkeley reinforced
Snyder’s rather philosophical view of the coming
computer revolution. Berkeley was one of the first
“futurists” in the computer field. ®?

Page 249
Page 250

“TOP SECRETHCONINTHREL-USA AUS AN-GBR-AND-NeEHX4——

(S7#8B-There was a much more practical side
to Snyder’s trips around the East Coast. By at
least mid-1947 the SIS decided that it would not
let OP-20-G bethe only one with an electronic
general-purpose computer. Snyder was sent to all
the companies and academic institutions that had
indicated they were going to take the risk of build-
ing acomputer. The only centers Snyder did not
seem to visit were ERA, Harvard, and Western
Electric. He skipped ERA because he already
knew about its computer design and, perhaps,
because from the beginning, the SIS did not want
just aclone ofthe navy’s computer. Nor did it
want to become dependent on the navy’s captive
corporation.” Hebypassed Harvard, where
Howard Aiken continued to build ordnance com-
puters, because the unique Harvard architecture
did not seem right for cryptanalytic work. The
Western Electric postwar devices also seemed to
bea bit “old” in terms of design and hardware.

(87/SB-Snyder’s trips were exciting; he was
becoming a pioneer. He was able to see all that
the fledgling UNIVAC group in Philadelphia was
doing. Heeven spent time with Grace Hopper,
who was becoming alegend inthe computer
world for her contributions to programming.
While in Philadelphia, he also made contact with
the EDVAC team. Then he headed for Princeton
and the Institute for Advanced Study where
Julian Bigelow was leading the group that was
slowly making John von Neumann’s concept turn
into hardware. The Institute and Bigelow were
impressive, but Snyder continued his search.
Soon he was in Boston, where he found what he
thought was the most promising ofall the com-
puter projects in the country. It was the one with-
in Vannevar Bush’s old company, Raytheon.
Bush, however, had nothing to do with the proj-
ect. In fact, many of its bright engineers had come
out of the World War II computer projects run by
Howard Aiken at Harvard.

(U) Snyder thought that Raytheon’s R.M.
Bloch, R. V. D. Campbell, and M. Ellis were doing
the most exciting work inthe country and were

the most likely to be able to construct the type of
computer the SIS needed.®? In addition to the
design ofits computer, Raytheon was attractive
because it was the only large corporation in the
country willing to subsidize computer develop-
ment.

(U) The company was ina unique position.
Raytheon had gone from a moderate size firm in
the 1930s to become a major defense contractor
during World War II. It was aggressively seeking
new products and markets that would allow it to
keep its position in the peacetime economy. That
was in contrast, for example, to IBM, which was
unwilling to endanger its major product lines by
leaping into computers.

(F8#/8H) The small firms that were showing
interest in computers were not viable alternatives
for Snyder. Investing in them posed a risk for any
purchaser. Even the one with the best reputation
was showing signs that it was overreaching itself.
UNIVAC’s Eckert and Mauchly wanted the SIS’s
work, but could not commit to building a
machine that would suit the needs of cryptanaly-
sis within areasonable time. In addition, there
may already have been security problems at the
company. °4

(& That left Raytheon as almost the only
option for the SIS. Then the proposed Raytheon
machine received more acclaim. While Sam
Snyder was making the rounds ofthe computer
centers, his research group had been examining
the designs ofall the proposed computers and
found that Raytheon’s was to be a data processor,
at least much more so than Atlas or any of the von
Neumann machines, because it was a four-
address device. In addition, although it was a seri-
al processor, its speed would be more than ade-
quate because itwas tohave alarge and fast
memory built of Selectrons. Although ERA had
concluded that the Selectron might never appear
and turned to the drums, the SIS bet that it would
soon emerge from RCA’s research laboratory.

“FOP SECRETHCOMINTHREE USA, AUS; CAN GBR AND NZEIT—
FOP-GEERETHCOMINTHREL-UGA_AUS -GAN-GBR-AND-NZEH—

~“S) Talks were begun with Raytheon’s man-
agement, and by fall 1947 the SIS group thought
an advanced computer was about to be built for
them. The early plans included more than just a
fast memory. Raytheon promised to make its
computer more of a data processor than any other
by developing revolutionary magnetic tape and
wire systems. They were to provide high-speed
bulk input, and there were even hopes of devising
high-speed output mechanisms. Perhaps as
important, the SIS thought that Raytheon might
deliver amachine before Atlas could be sent to
Washington.

£8) It wasn’t too long before those hopes were
dashed. Raytheon let the SIS know that because it
had obtained acontract for acomputer from
another navy agency (through the NBS), it would
beat least three years before aSIS computer
could becompleted. Although the company
offered an attractive price, $350,000, and indi-
cated it would be able to provide the SIS with a
machine that included their very promising plas-
tic tape systems, they declared they would pro-
vide it on their schedule.

+S}The SIS group hesitated before accepting
the new offer, thinking that three years was much
too long to wait. They had been very busy writing
their own version ofthe Pendergrass report and
had already written programs for the type of
machine they desired. Those investments seemed
too much to waste. But there was no alternative to
Raytheon.

ES) When the SIS managers returned to the
company, they were somewhat resigned to a long
wait, although they planned to bargain over deliv-
ery schedules. As they started the negotiations,
they received ashock. The company had
reworked its estimate ofthe cost ofa computer
that met Snyder’s needs. Raytheon now wanted
so much more that the SIS turned the offer down
without further bargaining.

—TEP-GEGRETIGOMINTHREL-USAAUS-CAN-GEROANE NEE

(VU) Stratton’s Dream Revisited

(U) Innear desperation, Snyder went to the
National Bureau of Standards. Standards had
visions of becoming what Stratton had desired a
generation before: the center for computer devel-
opment in the nation. John Hamilton Curtiss, an
applied mathematician with aHarvard degree
and wartime navy experience, had been hired by
the new crusading leader ofthe NBS, E.U.
Condon, to accomplish that. By 1947 Condon had
funds for computer development and was on the
way to becoming an intermediary for all govern-
ment agencies’ computer purchases. With a
group ofenergetic engineers and mathemati-
cians, the NBS guided, for example, develop-
ments at UNIVAC and Raytheon. It was doing
much more. It was encouraging and coordinating
the work of many contractors who were develop-
ing computer components, and itwas making
suggestions to builders toimprove computer
architecture. ©

(U) But contact with the NBS did not lead to
any immediate relief for Snyder. The best the
NBS said it could do was to allow Snyder’s group
to attend the computer lectures it was conducting
and to provide leads to new companies that might
be willing to build a computer.

(U) It was mid-1948 and the SIS still did not
have a final design or a contractor.

€€&} The SIS went incircles for atime, then
came back toan earlier contact, the Reeves
Instrument Corporation, aNew York firm that
was aleader inthe analog computer business. It
had just completed avery useful and pathbreak-
ing electronic differential analyzer, the REAC. It
had also gained some digital experience by help-
ing the University of Pennsylvania with its com-
puter projects. More importantly, it had let it be
known that it was going into the digital computer
business. To do soit had hired one ofthe most
unusual men inthe early computer business,

Page 251
Page 252

TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL SA AUS CAN CBR AND NZUIXT

Samuel Lubkin, to supervise the design and con-
struction of its proposed REVAC.

6S) Lubkin was an alumnus of the important
University of Pennsylvania projects, and he want-
edto build his own improved version of an
EDVAC. His past experience and the preliminary
design of the Reeves machine convinced the SIS’s
team tosupport Lubkin’s design although he
planned touse delay-line rather than faster
Selectron memory. Abandoning the Selectron
was difficult, but there was an attractive trade-off:
Reeves was proposing to build its advanced ver-
sion of the EDVAC within one year for a bargain
price of $150,000. ®* Although the Reeves
machine would be serial and clock-based, it was
to use four addresses; most importantly, it would
beat Arlington Hall before the end of the
decade.°?

€&) Serious talks were begun with Reeves
inearly summer 1948 and Snyder and his team
felt vindicated.

(#8) Then chaos took hold again. Just as
negotiations were begun, Reeves announced it
was not going to branch out into digital comput-
ers.”°

€S) Lubkin immediately left the company. At
first Snyder thought that all was not lost. There
seemed achance that Lubkin could become an
SIS employee. At least the design for his machine
could be finished. Talks were held: then Lubkin
decided he wanted to found his own computer
company. For a moment it appeared that the SIS
might have its own version of ERA. That was a
short-lived dream. Lubkin could not raise the
necessary financing. Lubkin gave up and took a
government job, but not with the SIS. He went
with the National Bureau of Standards.

(U) There was no one left to build “Abner.”
For the SIS there was no American computer
industry. Then there were a few moments of relief
when the NBS gave some indications that it might

arrange for acomputer for the agency. As hap-
pened somany times before, the hopes were
defeated. The contractors the NBS was depending
upon for the computers to be used at its impor-
tant applied mathematics centers could not meet
their schedules. They got so far behind that the
NBS decided to build a machine for itself. That
eliminated any chance that the SIS could get a
machine within the near future. The NBS would
be too busy arranging for its “interim” computers.
Its work force had to concentrate on a machine to
save the NBS’s numerical centers, and its needs
would keep available subcontractors busy.”

($3 Swallowing a great deal of pride, the SIS
made another brief attempt to get Raytheon to
reconsider. No deal could be struck. Then the SIS
decided that it had only one alternative, unless it
was to give up on the idea of being one of the first
members of the world’s “computer club.” No mat-
ter what the risk, it had to build its own machine.
Snyder reasoned that since the SIS now had an
engineering staff ofsome sixty men who had
already had much electronics experience (as a
result oftheir work in radar and other military
electronics), there was a chance of success.

TS) But Snyder knew his group required help;
it needed some experienced and skilled computer
designers to flesh out the functional sketches
being produced by the SIS engineers, such as Ray
Bowman and Dwight Ashley. Again the SIS went
tothe National Bureau of Standards. Since
Lubkin was there and since he had already put so
much work into the design ofthe REVAC, it
seemed reasonable to expect cooperation and a
detail design within ashort time. The NBS was
reluctant totake onany more responsibilities,
however. They had their own crisis to deal with.
But after emphasizing that it was too busy to
build a machine for the agency, in early fall 1948
the NBS offered to take onthe design task for
$150,000.”" That seemed abit too expensive.
That was the amount that Reeves was to have
charged for adelivered machine, but the SIS’s
options were limited. So, even though the NBS

TOR-SECRETICOMINTIREL-USA-AUS-CAN-GBRAND NZOIAT
EO 3.3(h)(2) NZL/IX4

P.L. 86-36

was indicating that it was going to provide the SIS

_ only with something close toa copy ofthe very

simplified delay-line SEAC, itwas rushing to
. build for itself, the offer was accepted.”*

_ 8) To prepare for the arrival of the design, a
team of engineers was formed and programming
- classes were begun. Snyder felt that his ordeal
_ was finally over. The project seemed about ready
- to contribute operational results; there was great
_ enthusiasm. The new programmers went beyond
_ their lessons and began to write routines to attack

Soon the mathematicians
at the. SIS were swept up in the excitement over
the about-to-appear computer. Dick Liebler and
Hugh Gingerich even devised anew class of
attacks [Jones that could be done
only ona high-speed digital machine.”

“~S Unfortunately, the plans did not come
from the National Bureau of Standards on sched-
ule. Its crew was so busy with the bureau’s own
computer problems and those of the contractors
it was supervising for other government agencies,
that all Snyder got from them were promises to
hurry. The situation got worse when Lubkin
decided that Standards was not for him. That
complicated an already difficult situation because
those who took over his tasks favored a much
simpler machine than the SIS was expecting.”®

TS-There were meetings, but they were disap-
pointing. The NBS was willing to promise a
design for only a very bare bones device. And they
could not guarantee when those plans would be
ready for the engineers and programmers who
waited for them at Arlington Hall.

“~S3778P Everyone atthe SIS grew more frus-
trated. The frustration was compounded by grow-
ing ambitions. Asthe SIS engineers and pro-
grammers gained more experience, they thought
of many ways to make “Abner” an effective crypt-
analytic device.”° But it would have to be a much
more complex machine than the one proposed by
the NBS and amore intricate one than Atlas. It

FOP-GEGRETHIGOMINTHREE-USAAUS--CAN-GBR ANB NZEt—

was also clear that Abner was going tocost the
agency much more than had been imagined.

(U) So Much for Simplicity

(TS//SD. With young men like Ray Bowman
inthe lead, ideas were put forward to change
Abner into something more like aSled than a
simple EDVAC. He and others showed how basic
cryptanalytic functions could be turned into cir-
cuits that, they thought, should become an inte-
gral part of Abner. Some fifteen special “instruc-
tions” were drawn as circuit diagrams and were
shown to the few men at the NBS who had secu-
rity clearances.” Their reaction was not positive;
they felt they were being asked to do much more
than was initially agreed upon. And even when a
compromise was suggested, that the special func-
tions such as a two-message offset instruction be
put into a separate box that the SIS would design
and build, agreements could not be reached. Even
such abox, the NBS engineers argued, would
demand too many complex circuits inthe main
computer.” There was a stand-off, a quiet one,
but it was clear the two agencies had reached an
impasse in late 1949.”

(U) Another critical decision had to be made.
Should Abner be abandoned atleast until the
uncontrollable NBS decided to devote serious
attention to it? Or, since the SIS and OP-20-G
had been merged into the new Armed Forces
Security Agency, should everyone be required to
wait for the completion ofthe further advanced
Atlas project? Itdid not take too long for the
administrators to make acourageous decision.
They allowed the Arlington Hall engineers to go
ahead and design and build their own machine.

(U) That seemed areasonable decision
because so much agency effort had already gone
into Abner and because the computer manufac-
turers, including IBM, continued to back away
from taking contracts for machines. And the
agency knew that smaller companies, such as
Technitrol, could be counted on for components.

Page 253
Page 254

~TOR-GEGRETICOMHEREL-USA-AUS,-CAN.GBR.ANDNZLUX1

They were already helping with the special-pur-
pose machines the agency was considering.

(U) Abner’s Not Quite Best Friend

f&}-The decision to build Abner received an
unexpected justification in mid-1950. During the
first months ofthe Korean War, when the
American military was unable to show that it
could effectively police the world, it was at least
suspected that the American navy’s callsigns were
inadequate. New ones had to be generated to pro-
tect the fleet and its messages. There was a criti-
cal need to run “involuntary matrices” to ensure
randomness. That was a demanding job and one
that Solomon Kullback, the agency’s research
director, had given the highest priority.

4%) In summer 1950 a survey was made of the
possibility of running the matrices on IBM tabu-
lator equipment. The result was very disappoint-
ing. Then a suggestion was made that perhaps the
relay analog ofthe soon-to-be-delivered Atlas
could beused. Some ofthe mathematicians
explored the possibility and then, perhaps
prompted by Sam Snyder, looked at the possibil-
ity of using the NBS’s new SEAC. It was the inter-
im computer the NBS had decided to build on its
own in 1948. Constructed in two years, it was a
bare bones version of the EDVAC, but it worked.

-¢8) Required to estimate whether or not it
would be worthwhile to ask the NBS if SEAC
could be used onthe callsign problem, the SIS’s
programmers made pencil and paper calculations
of the power of various alternatives.

£8) Their estimates gave the following times
for gaining a completed and satisfactory matrix.®°

By Hand By Relay By Atlas By Seac
(Drum) (Delay)
shours 4.5 hours 3 minutes 20 seconds

($7 The results seemed unambiguous. The
electronic machines were undoubtedly faster

than hand or relay process, and most important-
ly, the delay-line machines, such as SEAC, were
orders faster than the ones with drum memory.
That finding was support for Abner’s cause and
for the NBS’s SEAC. As a result, Sam Snyder went
tothe National Bureau of Standards and gained
permission to use the SEAC for the matrix prob-
lem.™ Unfortunately, the first hands-on experi-
ence with an electronic computer was very disap-
pointing. Ifthere had not been so much invested
in Abner, the experience with SEAC might have
led to abandoning Abner.

-€§ A program for computing the matrices on
SEAC was written in some two months, not an
easy task inthe early 1950s. Then in September
some SEAC run time was allocated to the agency
— but on weekends and nights and at $24.00 an
hour, not an inconsiderable sum at the time. The
expense had not been foreseen, nor had the
SEAC’s temper. SEAC soon taught the analysts
that there was a vast difference between the theo-
retical internal speed of computers and their real
operating time.

(S) The first post-midnight session on SEAC
took twelve very discouraging hours. Despite all
the care that had been taken, the result had to be
abandoned because of repeated machine errors.
A few days later some 200 matrices were created,
but then errors crept in again. After just two
hours of successful runs, it was decided that a
checking program should be written so that all
results could be verified.

4) The frustrations continued. In mid-
September, SEAC worked only four out of sixteen
hours, and the results that were obtained were
put into question because ofthe quirky behavior
of the computer.

£8) On September 19 SEAC did more than fol-
low the laws of early computer technology (to
rarely work); itcommitted aserious _ political
blunder. The agency had reserved a precious
twelve-hour chunk oftime, between noon and

—FOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL-USA-AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEIIE-
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA AUSCAN-GBR-AND-NZEHKE

midnight, because some official had decided it
was appropriate that the great secret of SEAC and
the future Abner be revealed to the SIGINT com-
munity. Some twenty-five people were invited to
watch the NBS’s machine in action. Sam Snyder
was in charge of running SEAC.

(S) Much to Snyder’s embarrassment, ofthe
entire twelve hours “o hours were productive.”
He was so angry that he wrote in a report, “In the
future, when trouble with SEAC develops, no
more attempts will be made by personnel of this
Section to find the cause of the difficulty.”°?

(S) Despite the anger and the problems that
continued to be encountered with SEAC runs, it
was decided to keep the matrices that had been
produced.

(UV) Abner by Inertia
<6). While SEAC was refusing to give its best,

the crew at Arlington Hall got to work building
Abner, not telling the NBS exactly what they were

doing. They worked so quickly and quietly that
when the NBS representatives finally appeared at
Arlington Hall with some sketches, they were
shown, with much ceremony, the completed SIS
design. *8

(6) That design had become very ambitious,
going far beyond the NBS’s SEAC.** The basic
EDVAC approach was maintained, but many spe-
cial functions were included. Abner became much
more of a crypto-computer than Atlas.

€S} Three groups of special instructions were
built into Abner. The first made encipher/deci-
pher tasks easier. Aprogrammer could call for
addition without carrying and specify which
number base, ranging from two to greater than
thirty-two. Abner could very quickly run key
against text, imitating many ofthe previous spe-
cial-purpose machines. The second group of com-
mands made Abner a more efficient processor of
streams of data, allowing easy transfer of blocks
ofinformation and repetition ofa series of
instructions until a task was completed. The third

 

—4 Abner

Page 255
Page 256

TOP SECRETICONINTHREL USA, AUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZL —

group contained instructions that made Abner a
powerful “comparator.” Using the one Swish
instruction, a programmer could tell Abner to™®

Pass two variable length streams of five-bit
characters from memory to the control of the ana-
lytic unit of the machine;

Compare groups of varied sizes (one to sixty-
three characters) for coincidences;

Store the count in a specified location;

Offset one data stream to prepare it for anoth-
er round of coincidence testing.

-¢ As significant for the evolution of the com-
puter, there were courageous attempts to give
Abner what most other computers of the time did
not have, arange of powerful input and output
devices. A big gamble was taken: the new plastic
magnetic tapes could be made to function.
Connections for six of the Raytheon drives were
installed. A punched tape reader was attached as
well. Not as exciting, but more important from an
operational standpoint, an IBM collator was to be
used for card input and a modified IBM card
punch for output.® There were many software
developments. By the time Abner was completed
in April 1952, the SIS programmers had written a
wide range of operational routines. *’

(U) Abner’s Bad Temper

€$-But it was some two years between the
time the SIS engineers decided to detail their own
Abner and its start-up as an operational machine.
And its cost climbed to twice the original estimate
of $300,000. Even then, it was just, as one engi-
neer put it, an “experimental model.”

4S And itwas almost astemperamental as
SEAC. Its special functions made it a bit too com-
plicated to maintain (it had 1,500 tubes and
25,000 diodes), the PO devices and their inter-
faces had many troublesome moments, and the

more than 100 delay lines needed constant fine-
tuning.

“tS} The limitations ofthe 1952 Abner were
obvious. But its problems did not cause the SIS to
abandon computers. A contract was let to have
the Technitrol company in Philadelphia build a
new version. It arrived in mid-1955, cost approx-
imately $1,000,000, and like Abner I, had an
operational price tag of almost the same amount.

-€S) It was known in the 1940s that operators,
cooling systems and repairs would make comput-
ers very expensive to maintain. But there was
another cost that was not anticipated: program-
ming. Abner I needed $130,000 a year worth of
programmer time plus additional amounts for
special projects.°?

“tS7/SB Abner had another expense: a clone.
In 1950 it was decided that Abner should have the
same kind of relay-circuit cousin that had been
quickly built to train Atlas’s programmers. When
the construction of “Baker” began, no one expect-
ed it to take two years to complete, nor to become
the size of a room. Nor did anyone foresee that
the relay version of Abner would be much less
reliable than the new electronic machine. Baker
proved so difficult that it never kept its promise to
bean inexpensive training and program-debug-
ging aid to Abner.*°

48) Despite Baker’s failings, many innovative
programs were written for Abner. They spanned
all cryptanalytic attacks as well as data processing
tasks. The list of programs is impressive, espe-
cially when itis realized they were written in an
era when programming was something ofa black
art. For many years programs had to be written in
the o’s and 1’s the computer recognized, and even
when “higher” level languages appeared, pro-
gramming and debugging were energy-draining
and emotion-laden exercises.

ES Abner was used to “diarize” as well as to
analyze wired rotor systems. But perhaps its most

—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINTHIREL-USAAUS-CAN-CBRANE NZEHKT—
—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL USA AUS-CAN-GBRAND-NZEA—

useful program was Stethoscope. Written very
early in the history of programming, it became a
classic. Stethoscope very efficiently applied all the
major statistical attacks against cipher text in
unknown systems.” The routines proved so valu-
able, and the potentials of expanding Stethoscope
seemed so great, that a very courageous step was
taken by the SIS programmers. They decided to
write one ofthe very first compilers. Bill Cherry
played akey role inthe LULU project to create
software that would allow programmers to very
easily compose and correct programs that called
many subroutines. With the help of LULU and
its follow-on, Stethoscope became the much
more powerful general cryptanalytic program,
Supersteth.

(VU) And Then Came ...

(FS4H/8SD It had taken many years and millions
of dollars toprove that auniversal computer
could be a valuable statistical tool, however. And
there were some critical moments when it seemed
that aspecial architecture would bethe wisest
choice for the SIGINT agencies. In fact, one of the
gravest crises inthe history of American crypt-
analysis shifted attention to such alternatives and
highlighted the weaknesses ofthe new general-
purpose computers. “Black Friday” of 1948 saw a
return toa faith in special-purpose devices; they
seemed the only way to overcome Soviet systems
that were making the Enigma and even Tunny
look simple. But “Black Friday” also showed how
far the computer had to go before it could replace
the old reliable data processors, the tabulators.

Notes

1.(U) NSA, OP-20-G, J.T. Pendergrass,
“Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed Digital Computing
Machines,” 1946. NSA, Samuel S. Snyder “Influence of
United States Cryptologic Organizations on the Digital
Computer Industry,” dates the beginning of Goldberg
to1947 perhaps on the basis ofthe contract for the
machine rather than on the date of start of the explo-
rations for a universal scanning machine.

TOP-SECRETICOMINTHIREL USA AUS-CAN-GERAND-NZEH

2.(U) Interview with Philip J. Bochicchio, July
1994, On Rachman, €FS*4Sb) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
and CCH Computer History Box, OP-20-G “War Diary
Reports: March 1, 1943 - May 31, 1948,” August 1945.

3.(U) Anthony Ralston (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Computer Science (New York: Van Norstrand
Reinhold, 1976), 482, 1459.

4.t@-NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK, Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, I-2.

5. (U) On the postwar Selector project and its tie to
Bush and “G’s” ERA, see Colin Burke, Information
and Secrecy: Vannevar Bush, Ultra, and the Other
Memex (Metuchen, N.J.: The Scarecrow Press, 1994.)
On Bush and Eisenhower, see Thomas Johnson,
American Cryptology during the Cold War: Book I,
Ft. George Meade, MD: NSA Center for Cryptologic
History, 1995.

6.(U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy:
Vannevar Bush, Ultra, and the Other Memex,
(Metuchen, N.J.: The Scarecrow Press, 1994), Ch. 14.

7.(U) NSA, OP-20-G, J.T. Pendergrass,
“Cryptanalytic Use of High-Speed Digital Computing
Machines,” 1946. (U) NSA, Samuel S. Snyder,
“Influence of United States Cryptologic Organizations
on the Digital Computer Industry” dates the beginning
of Goldberg to 1947, perhaps on the basis of the date of
the contract for the machine rather than on the date of
the start ofthe explorations for a universal scanning
machine.

8. (T8445) NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. H.
Campaigne, “Reading TUNNY,” NSA Technical
Journal, (Fall 1962). (484-8) A fascinating source for
the history of OP-20-G are Campaigne’s War Diaries,
1943-1945.

9.(U) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder, Box 8,
OP-20-G4, “Report onconference held at Navy
Department 15 May 1946. “Survey of large scale auto-
matic computing machines, given byJ. von
Neumann,” Howard Campaigne, 16 May 1946.

10. (U) Martin Campbell-Kelly and Michael R,
Williams (ed.), The Moore School Lectures: Theory
and Techniques for the Design of Electronic Digital
Computers (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985).

11. (48 NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study, Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.

Page 257
Page 258

 

“TOF SECRETICOMINTIREL USK, BUS, CRN GER ANT ZUR

F54481) NSA CCH Series XI Z, “Mechanization in
Support of COMINT, Phase Il: Third Addition, 1
November 1956. (U) “Remarks at the Dedication of
John von Neumann Hall,” NSA Technical Journal, Vi
(Winter 1961): 1.5) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Morris
Pomerantz and Lawrence A.Sames, “Data
Distribution Network for the TABLON Mass Storage
System,” circa 1970.

12. €P8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Lt. Cdr. J.T.
Pendergrass, “High Speed Digital Computing
Machines, Cryptanalytic Uses of,” 15 October, 1946.
(797/68 NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne and
J.T. Pendergrass, “Second Report on Cryptanalytic
Use of High Speed Digital Computing Machines,” OP-
20-L, 18 December 1946. Campaigne wrote one of the
programs inthe first report, but that has not been
remembered. He was listed as the joint author in the
second one.

13. (U) It is important to note that the reports did
not claim that the machine was anefficient data
processor. All of the many examples were cryptanalyt-
ic ones, and processing-heavy methods such as'T/A
were not mentioned.

14. C28} NSA CCH Series XII Z,Lt. Cdr. J.T.
Pendergrass, “High Speed Digital Computing
Machines, Cryptanalytic Uses of,” 15 October 1946, 1.

15. (U) von Neumann had, at first, favored a four-
address system, then changed to the one-address idea
because it would be better suited to mathematical
machines. Pendergrass thought that the one-address
was best for erypto-work. In contrast the SIS comput-
er pioneers favored the four-address system.

16. F478) NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. H.
Campaigne and J.T. Pendergrass, “Second Report on
Cryptanalytic Use of High Speed Digital Computing
Machines,” OP-20-L, 18 December 1946. The available
copy of this report did not contain the Mercury pro-
gram, but it was cited as part of the report on page 1.

17. (8) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Status of Digital
Computers, November 1946.”

18. (R) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Status of Digital
Computers, 20 January 1947.”

19. (R. He included Alan Turing’s work.

20. (@YNSA CCH Series XII Z, Ann M. Ford, “The
Birth of Atlas 1, NSA Technical Journal, XVII (Winter
ae, NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on RAM Panel Meetings,” notes on the
13 November 1946 meeting clearly show that the digi-
tal computer was seen as a practical cryptanalytic tool,
not just a research machine.

22. ) NSA AHA ACC-32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Memorandum for
Research Division and Section Heads,” 23 January
1947.

23. 4) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ann M. Ford, “The
Birth of Atlas 1,” NSA Technical Journal, XVIII
(Winter 1973): 53.

24. (U) On the interesting Aiken designs, Michael
R. Williams, A History ofComputing Technology,
(Englewood Cliffs, N. J: Prentice-Hall, 1985).

25.48 NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Estimated Delivery to
NCML,” circa 1951. Atlas was given an AA priority;
that was higher than Goldberg's, at least during the
late 1940s.

26. &) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” CNO to Chief of Bureau
of Ships, 23 May 1947.”

27. CES473T) NSA CCH Series XU Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” notes of
meeting of 22 November 1946, page 2,shows “G”
believed RCA and the NBS were soon going to build a
computer.

28. CFRYSD NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report I,” 21 December 1948, 10. (F5446R) NSA CCH
Series XII Z,“File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram
Panel Meetings,” report of 14 November 1946 meeting.

29. &} NSA CCH XIK, Box 8,Snyder, “An
Evaluation of NSA’s Atlas I,” Ann Ford H12, 8
November 1970. March seems to have been a critical
month in Atlas history. “G” decided to build its own
machine because no vendor seemed willing to do so.

30. (} NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder,’Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Summary of Conference
on Task 13 (Adlas),” 19 and 21 August 1947.

31. &) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” “Second Revision of

FOR-GEGRETIGOMINFIREL-UGA- AUS,-GAN-CBR-AND-NeLe—
Military Characteristics of the Analytic Computer
(ATLAS),” 6 July 1948.

32. (U) W. W. Stifler (ed.), High-Speed Computing
Devices,(New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,
1950), 370.

33. (U) Apparently, the proposed MIT tube was
quite like Wilkes’.

34. (U) The result, a Selectron, was not available
until the early 1950s. It was used in one von Neumann
type of computer, but never afterward. One of the
many leaps incomputer technology had made ita
technological dinosaur.

35. (PS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949,”
Meeting of April 15, 1947.

36. CPS4AGH NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21December 1948. Electrostatic storage
had also been planned for Goldberg.

37. S45) NSA AHA ACC 11112, “Interim Report
on Computer Research,” circa 1948.

38. (U) On microfilm, &) NSA CCH Series XI K,
Sam Snyder, Box 12, “Analytic Machinery Principles,”
September 1949. On Atlas’ drum, 4F&NSA AHA ACC
13643 “Atlas I. “

39. (U) Philip J. Bochicchio has recounted his
experiences with the earliest magnetic drums. He stat-
edthat ini945, after gaining access tocaptured
German equipment, he created a primitive drum that
was taken by Joe Eachus to ERA. That inspired ERA,
stated Mr. Bochicchio.

40. (F8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Report of the
Second Computer Study Group,” asin NSA Technical
Journal, XIX (Winter 1974): 21-61. (Z8) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, file folder, “Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949.”

41. 4} There were problems with the Goldberg
drums, and they were run ata low 240 rpm. (S) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Goldberg Progress Reports,” 30
December 1947 through 10 April 1951.

42. GSAS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21 December 1948. G&) NSA AHA 36746,
Engineering Research Associates, Inc., “Proposal
for An Electronic Rotor Program,” 19 December

1946. GS) NSA AHA ACC 8252, OP-20-G,

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZETAT—

“Communications Intelligence Research Plans, 1948,”
7 April 1947. (P8//8t) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Joint
Long Term Program (Old Planning Material, 1948-
1949) compiled by Doug Hogan. ¥6) NSA AHA ACC
32685 “Summary of Conference on Task 13 (Atlas),” 19
and 21 August 1947.

43. () J.J. Eachus, “SIGMAGE Threshold
Control,” 2 July 1946. (FS} NSA CCH Series XII Z, file
folder, “Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-
1949.” Monogram’s proposed allocations for computer
research for 1949 were quite generous: $1,000,000 for
general-purpose computer work and $1,000,000 for
SPD and related electronic work. 5} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, BuShips, “Specifications Sled Navy Models
CXOA and CXNQ Block Diagrams,” 1 October 1948,
Monogram’s 1948 budget was cut inhalf bythe
bureau, (FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949,”
entry for 21 November 1947.

44. FFS++SB NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by
Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings,” notes on 27
July 1948 meeting. ($}NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder,
“Atlas Computer Correspondence,” “Estimated
Delivery to NCML,” circa 1951. (U) Hagley Museum
and Library, Accession 1901, Yuter Papers, May 20,
1947, ERA Tompkins Report on Atlas, “shift Goldberg-
Demon men to project.” (U) Erwin Tomash, “The Start
ofan ERA: Engineering Research Associates, Inc.,
1946-1955,” in N. Metropolis, et al., (ed.), A History of
Computing inthe Twentieth Century (New York:
Academic Press, 1980), 485-496.

45. (8) NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 9.

46. (} NSA CCH XIK, Box 8,Snyder, “An
Evaluation of NSA’s Atlas I,” Ann Ford Hi2, 8
November 1970.

47. (}-NSA AHA ACC 32685 “First Endorsement
on ERA. Inc... 23 February 1951. (U) Samuel S.
Snyder “Influence of United States Cryptologic
Organizations on the Digital Computer Industry,” The
Journal of Systems and Software,1 (1979): 90-91.
(U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession 1901,
Yuter Papers: Engineering Research Associates,
October 9, 1946, Meeting on NBS computer plans,
“Summary of Computing Conferences”; Tompkins to

Page 259
Page 260

“TOP SECRE TICOMINTIREL USA, AUS -CAN-CBRANB-NzEHd

Norris, October 19, 1946, “Computing Business”;
December 1946, “Reports on OP-20-G Projects and
Atlas Computer”; and Goldberg Report, June 27, 1947.

48. t8745]) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 7. f& NSA AHA ACC 32685,
“Atlas I” circa 1952.

49. (84454) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 7.

50. GS) NSA AHA 6851 Atlas Analytic Computer,
“Military Characteristics ofthe Analytic Computer
(Atlas),”, June 1947. NSA AHA ACC 13643,
“Memoranda on Electronic Computers, Atlas I,” circa
1952. (NSA AHA ACC 32685 “AFSA-351 Atlas
Programming Bulletin No 1,” February 1951.

51. (2° NSA CCH XIK, Box 8,Snyder, “An
Evaluation of NSA’s Atlas I,” Ann Ford Hie2, 8
November 1970, 8.

52. 8-46 NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 8.

53.3) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Report of the
Second Computer Study Group,” asin NSA Technical
Journal XIX (Winter 1974): 21-61. f*) NSA CCH
XI K, Box 8, Snyder, “An Evaluation of NSA’s Atlas I,”
Ann Ford H12, 8 November 1970.

54. €&) NSA AHA ACC 32685, folder, “Atlas
Computer Correspondence,” CNO to Chief of Bureau
of Ships, 23 May 1947.

55- 6} NSA CCH Series XIK Box 8, Snyder,
“Yearly Cost of Representative NSA Machines,” May
1955.

56. € NSA Technical Literature Series
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 11. (FS7/ST) NSA
AHA ACC 30851, “Historical Notes on Computers at
NSA,” suggests that metallic tapes were planned.

57. (U) Onthe naming ofthe machine, (64/57)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-
82 with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982. The most
complete survey of Abner is (@}-NSA CCH Series XII Z
and XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then

There Were Two, the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft,
December 1979. See also, (U) Samuel S. Snyder,
“Abner: The ASA Computer, Part I: Design,” NSA
Technical Journal, XXV No. 2 (Spring, 1980): 49. (U)
Samuel S. Snyder, History of NSA General Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964.

58. (U) The electronic group had some sixty
employees in 1946.

59. (2) NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S, Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, I-6.

60. (874755) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 70.

61. €@--NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, I-10.
(#9 NSA CCH Series XI K, S.Snyder, Box 8, Mary
Neely Roseboro, CSGAS-76c, “Commentary on the
Pendergrass Report,” 15 October 1947.

62. (84454) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 121.

63. (U) See also, R. M. Bloch et al., “Logical Design
of the Raytheon Computer,” Mathematical Tables and
Other Aids to Computation, 3 (October 1948): 286.

64. £54465 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 121. The UNIVAC design had a serious
shortcoming for cryptanalytic work. The standard
UNIVAC had adecimal (BCD) organization. That
meant it was not suited to handle many crypto-tasks.
Especially important were the new targets of the cryp-
to-groups, the baudot-based binary systems. The
analysis of such systems demanded bit-by-bit testing,
asdid many ofthe older targets. S#/8D NSA CCH
Series XII Z,NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers,by Samuel S. Snyder,
1964, 13.

65. (FS) NSA CCH Series XII X-MPRO, U.S.
Cryptanalytic Research and Development Committee,
“Joint Long Term Program for Research and
Development inthe Field of Cryptanalytic
Equipment,” 21 July 1948. (S) NSA CCH Series KI K

—TORSECRETHCOMAFHREL-USA AUS, CAN GBR AND NZCIXT
TO

Box 8, Sam Snyder, “Evaluation of Computers as Crypt
Aids,” 7 September 1948.

66. (UF Mina Rees, “The Mathematical Sciences
and World War II, American Mathematical Monthly,
87(1980): 607-621. William Aspray and Michael
Gunderloy, “Early Computing and Numerical Analysis
atthe National Bureau of Standards,” Annals of the
History of Computing ,11 (1989): 3-11. John Todd,
“John Hamilton Curtiss, 1909-1977,” Annals of the
History of Computin g, 2 (1980): 104-9. R. Cochrane,
Measures for Progress: A History ofthe National
Bureau of Standards (Washington: G.P. O., 1966).
Samuel S. Snyder, “Abner: The ASA Computer, Part 1:
Design,” NSA Technical Journal, 25 (1980): 49.

67. (54/45R) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 13.€6-NSA CCH Series XII Z
and XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then
There Were Two, the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft,
December 1979, I-13.

68. 44 NSA CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S, Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, I-13

69. 6/748P NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S.Snyder, 1964, 12. Raytheon also chose a
more data-oriented design with four addresses for its
RAYDAC.

70. GS NSA CCH Series XI, Snyder, Box 8,
folder, “Snyder Computer Trips, 1947-1951.” (G} NSA
CCH Series XII Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9, Samuel S.
Snyder, “And Then There Were Two, the Abner Story,”
Fourth Draft, December 1979, I-14.

71. (U) James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary
of Data Processing: Biographies (New York:
Greenwood Press, 1987), 64.

72. (U) NSA CCH Series XIJ Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, 1-15.

73. (U) Samuel S.Snyder, “Abner: The ASA
Computer, Part I: Design,” NSA Technical Journal, 25
(1980): 49. Samuel S.Snyder, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964,
15. €6+ NSA CCH Series XH Zand XI K Snyder, Box 9,

—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTTREL USA AUS"“CAN BRAND NZL —

Samuel S, Snyder, “And Then There Were Two, the
Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, H-3.

74.€5) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. F. Gingerich, R.
A. Leibler, “Hagelin Crib D Dragging ona High Speed
Automatic Computing Machine,” 26 August 1949. (}
NSA CCH Series XI K Box 8, Sam Snyder, “Evaluation
of Computers as Crypt Aids,” 7 September 1948.

75. (U) Samuel S. Snyder, “Influence of United
States Cryptologic Organizations onthe Digital
Computer Industry,” The Journal ofSystems and
Software, 1 (1979): 92.

76. (5443) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 14.

77. (8+¢58 NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 15, gives a full list of the spe-
cial functions including the “Swish,” which was “the
logical equivalent of a complete high-speed compara-
tor.” The proposed special function of Abner found its
way into the later Harvest machine.

78. (ES) NSA AHA ACC 10842, Ray L. Bowman,
“Engineering Diary,” circa 1945-1950. (S//SI) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82
with Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982.

79.4€) NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, II-15.
The security clearance problem seems to have, again,
complicated matters. Itmade communications diffi-
cult. The NBS faced severe problems because of “loyal-
ty” questions in the early 1950s.

80. () NSA CCH Series XII Z, AFSA-32,
Marvine Bass, “On Methods and Speed of
Construction of Involuntary Matrices,” August 1950.

81. (§) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder Box 10,
“Extracts from AFSA-351D Weekly Reports re Seac
Production.”

82. ) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder Box 10,
“Extracts from AFSA-351D Weekly Reports re Seac
Production.”

83. (} NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, III-19.

Page 261
TORSECRETICOMING/REL—USAAUS.-G:AN-GBR-AND-NEEHE

84. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z and XI K Snyder, Box
9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two, the
Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, 1-2.

85.<4-NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph
No. 2,Samuel S.Snyder, History of NSA General-
Purpose Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 16.

86. &} Auseful personal insight into Abner is
Russell Chauvenet, “Early Days in NSA Computing,”
Cryptolog , August 1977: 8-10.

87. NSA Technical Literature Series Monograph
No. 2,Samuel S.Snyder, History of NSA  General-
Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 17. Abner
was ready for its checkout phase in September 1951. All
its instructions were accepted in April 1952.

88. (} NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S.Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, IV-14.
(U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,to Cryptolog editor, by
R. L. Bernard, “Comments on Abner,” 18 January 1978.

89. 6S} NSA CCH Series XI K Box 8, Snyder, “Yearly
Cost of Representative NSA Machines,” May 1955.

90. (8773H NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA Technical
Literature Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA
General-Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, by
Samuel S. Snyder, 1964, 18.

91. (+ NSA CCH Series XII Zand XIK Snyder,
Box 9, Samuel S. Snyder, “And Then There Were Two,
the Abner Story,” Fourth Draft, December 1979, IV-8.
(TS) NSA CCH Series XIK, Snyder, Box 16, List of
Operational Abner Programs.

Page 262 FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL- USA, AUS_CAN GBR AND NZI
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USA; AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZE—

Chapter 9

(U) Wandering into Trouble

 

— th

er caw

 

r

(U) A Cryptanalytic Future

FS) Although OP-20-G and the SIS were
frustrated by the delays intheir Atlas and Abner
computer projects, 1948 began as a year of con-
tinued triumph for American communications
intelligence. The cryptologic systems of the major
powers were being read, and COMINT seemed
about to supply America’s leaders with the type of
high-level information that had won “G” and the
SIS so many accolades in World War IL.

(FS Most of Stanford C. Hooper's dreams
seemed to have been realized. The army and navy
COMINT organizations had some professional
mathematicians, they were starting vibrant new
RAM programs, and they even had “scientific”
advisory boards. The future of advanced crypt-
analysis was bright, as was the future of American
intelligence in general.

(BS) Most important, the Cold War, it
seemed, was to be a cryptanalytic one. A few for-
eign systems carrying high-level messages would
yield to mathematics and computers and provide
the kind ofinformation needed to predict and,
perhaps, counter the actions of the political and
military leaders ofall the important nations.
There was even cryptanalytic progress against
internal enemies. Old diplomatic messages were
giving what was needed to find and break up
Soviet espionage rings within the United States.
There was hope that further works would lead to
entries into all current Eastern bloc diplomatic
and clandestine systems.

CES) Cryptanalytic success would not be
expensive. Direction finding as well asthe very
labor-intensive traffic and plain language analy-
ses would play secondary roles. America’s
COMINT agencies would not have to build a

5

costly communications system to speed massive
amounts of data to processing centers because
high-level cryptanalysis provided lead time.
Cracking important systems would give insight
into the grand intentions of the world’s political
and military leaders, and that would give
American policy makers time to formulate meas-
ured responses.

TTS) The belief that cryptanalysis would
bethe heart of SIGINT’s future was reflected in
the kind of machines the army and navy devel-
oped during the immediate postwar years. They
focused on general-purpose computers for crypt-
analysis, not ones for massive data processing.

(U) The Worst of Times

CFSASH sOThen the heroic cryptanalytic
assumption was suddenly undermined! In spring
1948 the SIGINT agencies had to rethink their
purpose and place in America’s intelligence
establishment. The Americans and their intelli-
gence partner, the British, were being locked out
ofthe world’s most important code and cipher
systems just as the Cold War became dangerous.
Three years after the end ofthe war, the Soviets
closed down their old high-level systems and
replaced them with ciphers that could not be pen-
etrated. Soon the Chinese revised their superen-

cryptions, making them quite sturdy. Even the
[__foreetiena their machines and proce-
ures.

(ISHSH Aseries ofvery significant intelli-
gence failures came after the cryptanalytic black-
out. That put American SIGINT’s future in jeop-
ardy. The Soviets’ A-Bomb, the Berlin Blockade,
the forming ofthe satellite bloc in Eastern
Europe, the fall.of China, and the Korean War
were not predicted.

f Page 263
P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA; AUS CAN -OBR-ANE-NZEHH—

“CFS} As the Soviets increased their strategic
military capabilities, the situation became criti-
cal. U.S. leaders demanded another Ultra and
Magic. But the new organizations created to coor-
dinate COMINT, the Armed Forces Security
Agency (AFSA) and then the National Security
Agency (NSA), were unable to replay World War
II's COMINT history. Their cryptanalysts faced
challenges much, much more difficult than
Purple or the Enigma. The new code and cipher
systems were sostrong that itseemed that
Hooper’s faith in mathematics, science, and com-
puters had been misplaced.

€FS478H The worth of SIGINT, especially
cryptanalysis, came into question bythe early
1950s. Many came to believe that cryptology had
improved so much that cryptanalysis was a lost
cause. The situation grew threatening: NSA was
almost confined to performing menial intelli-
gence tasks asthe Central Intelligence Agency
used a new techno-miracle, the U2 and its amaz-
ing cameras, to physically penetrate Soviet
Russia."

€4578P Even those who continued to believe
that another Ultra might emerge lost faith in the
National Security Agency and its ability to devel-
op its own techno-miracles. Asa result, through
much of the 1950s and 1960s, there were initia-
tives demanding the creation ofan alternative
relationship between science and SIGINT.
America seemed poised to give a new generation
ofthe likes of Vannevar Bush and John von
Neumann enormous amounts ofmoney and
complete power over cryptanalytic research and
policy. The United States came close to establish-
ing a Manhattan Project for the cryptanalysis of
Soviet systems, one which was to be staffed and
led by academics, not professional codebreakers.*

€£57/SD) The intransigence of the Soviets’ sys-
tems also had consequences for computer policy.
Onone hand, as NSA was forced to rely upon
noncryptanalytic sources for its “intelligence,” the
Agency became as much or more a data process-

Page 264

ing center than a “cryptanalytic” center.* That
caused NSA to search for high-speed substitutes
for the best data processors of the era, tabulating
equipment.

CFS+4S4) Those who kept their faith in the
powers of mathematical cryptanalysis sought a
different type of computer, a super-number-
cruncher. At the same time, more practical crypt-
analysts began a search for special-purpose com-
puters (SPDs), ones so fast that even brute force
cryptanalytic attacks would allow identification of
hoped-for weaknesses of the new machines of the
Russians and their allies.

€FS5//5h) The search for “busts” turned out to
bea formidable challenge with a strange techno-
logical twist. Identifying “bust” conditions was
demanding, but putting what was found to use
was agreater and more complex chore. Because
the “busts” did not produce statements of inten-
tions, only anew type of automated intelligence
“factory” could turn the chaos of millions of
“small facts” into valuable information.

+¢S-Although the resulting emphasis on auto-
mated data processing brought NSA’s computer
needs closer tothose ofthe private sector, the
Agency could not rely upon the market place to
supply what it needed. Whether the requirement
was for analytic or data processing devices, NSA
had to do much more than select hardware from
the shelves of computer manufacturers.

(U) A computer industry had begun to emerge
in the 1950s, and it matured in the next decade,
but itwas not meeting NSA’s needs. Even the
giant and wealthy IBM was unwilling to provide
what NSA required without a great deal of coax-
ing. As a result, NSA had to “interfere” in the mar-
ketplace.

(U) No permanent and satisfactory relation-
ship between the corporations and SIGINT was
created, however. NSA functioned in an unpre-
dictable and many times uncontrollable world.

FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-USAAUS-CAN-CBR-AND-NZLH—
FOP-SECRETHC OMINTHREL USA AUS-CAN-CBRAND-NZEHA

The computer industry was so unstable that “G’s”
captive corporation, ERA, was saved only by the
willingness of a larger corporation to absorb it.
Then politics forced anend tothe special rela-
tionship with it that Wenger had worked so hard
to establish.

~3} NSA was left adrift. It could not afford its
own computer manufacturing facilities, and it did
not have a cooperative and permanent corporate
partner.

(F84/5b That made it very difficult for the
Agency during the mid-1950s when it attempted
to overcome the technological advantage of
Soviet cryptology. Based on an intense faith that
new machines would work cryptanalytic and data
processing miracles, NSA became involved in
many projects to create new generations of com-
puter technology.

&S Those projects were not always successful.
Hopes were often far ahead of technology and of
the organizational and research abilities in the
computer industry. In several instances the
incompatibility of NSA’s technological needs and
those ofthe market place led the Agency’s con-
tractors astray. Delays, cost overruns, and less
than perfect machines became familiar. At least
one involvement, NOMAD, was an embarrassing
failure.

(TS77ST) But the Cold War was so dependent
upon intelligence gathering that NSA and its
allies were forgiven for most of the shortfalls. The
need for information, combined with the memo-
ry of Ultra and Magic, led to more than absolution
for not up-to-the-mark research and develop-
ment projects. Despite some earlier developmen-
tal missteps, NSA was granted massive support
for its efforts to reenter the Soviets’ higher level
cryptosystems. Inthe mid-1950s, NSA became
entangled in one ofthe great techno-gambles in
American history: it shunted tens of millions of
dollars to computer companies hoping to develop

FOP-SEGREHIGOMAFHREL-UGA-AUE-GAN-GE RAN BNE

machines so fast that its demanding attacks on
Soviet cipher systems would become practical.

C8448 The attempts led to advances in
computer technology and tonew generations
of special-purpose, architecturally innovative
RAMs. The new RAMs (SPDs) were arguably the
most powerful computers in the world. But even
without the challenge ofthe Soviet enciphering
machines, NSA would have become one ofthe
major users and sponsors of computers. By the
early 1960s, NSA’s “basement” became one of the
world’s great computer data processing centers.
But the drive to find acryptanalytic solution to
meet the Soviet threat was the driving force
behind the Agency’s great commitments to
advancing computer technology.

(U) The Magic Continues

GSHSB The World War IIalliance ofthe
United States, England, and Soviet Russia was
based on convenience, not basic trust. As a result,
in midwar America and England began intercept-
ing Soviet radio traffic and diplomatic telegraph
messages. The end of the war saw an increase in
the attention paid tothe Soviets. Great Britain
and the United States signed the historic BRUSA
agreement for SIGINT cooperation and intensi-
fied their joint work on Soviet and related sys-
tems.*

<€¥877/8D There was some astounding cryptan-
alytic progress, and by late 1946 there were indi-
cations that four ofthe most important Soviet
civil and military systems could be exploited.
There were also indications that its one-time-pad
diplomatic and clandestine systems might be
breached.

(S484) The reach of the BRUSA successes
was astounding. The British and Americans were
breaking into not just one, but several different
types ofenciphering machines and systems.
While ateam at the SIS began its three decades-
long Venona project on Soviet diplomatic/clan-

Page 265
destine messages, the British and then the
American cryptanalysts attacked the Russian

 

Longfellow

 

 

the Coleridg

 

 

 

 

“CTS/75H There was hope that the greatest o
nachine, might soon be’

 

prize of all, the
penetrated. No one was sure if it was a cousin of
an Enigma ora Soviet version ofthe American
ECM, but it seemed clear that carried
the type of messages that had gained such glory
for World War ITs cryptanalysis.

both inescapable and wise.” The Venona work
began to pay off. It was discovered, through end-
less rounds of tabulator processing, that during
the war the Soviets had reused some of their one-
time pads. Finding ‘led to
many readable messages. As the names of atomic
and other spies appeared from the decrypts of the
mid-1940s messages, there was hope that a simi-
lar effort would allow the postwar Soviet diplo-
matic communications to be read.

87781) But the Venona victories were not
complete; only a percentage of intercepted Soviet
traffic was decrypted, and “scientific” cryptanaly-
sis played a limited role. Many of the penetrations
came asa result of information provided by pris-
oners ofwar and documents and devices
retrieved from Germany.* Others were the result
of something less than pure cryptanalysis; in the
1940s the Soviets had yet to perfect their cryp-
tosecurity procedures. But traditional cryptanaly-
sis did contribute, and by 1947 exploitation was
more the result of machine analysis rather than
operator errors and procedural weaknesses. °

CS+4SH There were more successes. The

Americans joined the British codebreakers in
profitable attacks on a host of Soviet hand ciphers

Page 266

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

  
 

and code §3 systems, At the ¢ dphets of most other

 

~ es H88 In’ 1947-8 GoRcs, “G,” “and the SIS

oy appeared to be able to conquer any target."° The

codes of both Chinas were opening and those of

all the minor nations of the world were ‘penetra-

ble. In addition, the attack against the _]
cryptosystems gave the United States a great deal
of information about the Third World.

 

 

 

 

for much of their traffic. Somewhat later, Japan's
reintroduction of the Purple machine to generate

/one-time pads for its diplomats proved quite use-
CE8+/8Pr Devoting almost one-half of “G’s” /
and the SIS’s resources to the Soviet problem was.

ful to America’s SIGINT monitors. And the
nations that continued to use the Enigma gave
some of Joseph Desch’s Bombes, a productive sec-
ond life.”

CESHSH Atthe same time, England and
America were tapping the surge of Soviet plain
language transmissions, reading commercial
codes and ciphers, and using undecryptable mes-
sages for traffic analysis. By 1948: OP-20-G alone
was intercepting more than 1,000, 000 Soviet
plain-language messages ayear.. Some of that
material was quite valuable because, for example,
Soviet military production and deployments
could be inferred from the communications con-
cerning industrial orders and military logistics. *

€FS745H Plaintext analysis contributed much,
but cipher breaking was the hallmark of “G” and
the SIS during the first postwar years.

(U) At Last, the Electronic Bombe ~ Perhaps

CPSH/SH Inearly 1948 the emerging com-
mand over the Soviet cipher systems was so
promising that the Americans decided to invest in
two innovative and large-scale, special-purpose
electronic computers. They would: exploit the

penetrations__into the important Soviet
Longfellow | Their com-

 

~FOP-SECRETHCONINFHREL- UGA, AUS-GAN-CBR-AND-NZEHC
EO S3(A\(2Z)
>4.. 86-36

 
 
 
 

ag equaled the cost of one-fourth of
OP-20-G's World War IT Bombes.

SS Athird of a million dollars was committed
to Pluto, an electronic machine built by Sylvania,
the Boston electronics. ‘firm that was helping with
the construction of MIT's Whirlwind computer.
Pluto used twenty six-foot:by twenty-foot frames
crammed with vacuum. tubes. Those walls of
tubes and circuits were needed to test regular and

JLongfellow and other
devices.

 

Pluto’.ran through
1,000,000 settings a minute: ‘and was So precious
that only ahandful ofthe most trusted code-
breakers were informed of its existence.

€PS7748H Much more ambitious. ° .was
Hiawatha. In late 1947 electronic potentials final-
ly came together with a cryptanalytic opportunity

to force the release of massive funding for the®.
long-sought Electronic Super Bombe. The elusive.

electronic matrix finally seemed ready, and at the
same time enough had been learned about
Longfellow to think that abombe would allow
continuous reading ofits messages. A huge
amount for the time, $1,000,000, was promised,

and it was made clear that more would come if.

the development ofthe new and aptly named
“Hiawatha” machine demanded it.

84454) OP-20-G ordered its favored con-
tractor, ERA, to put its best men towork. In
March 1948 ateam was formed and the long-
awaited machine was begun. The attack on
Longfellow was thought to be just a prelude to
reading the rest of Russia’s most valuable com-
munications. The Cold War, itseemed, was to
have its own Ultra.

€FS4/5B Then, on April 11, 1948, the Soviets
took Hiawatha’s target off the air. The reaction in
America was immediate. The huge electronic
Hiawatha project at ERA was cancelled.“ A score
of small relay analogs of Longfellow became use-
less. Sylvania was told to complete Pluto, but it

 

was turned to analyzing the of
sometimes-friendly nations.”

 

 

 

ES//5B The bright young mathematician of
World War II’s OP-20-G who had remained on as
one ofthe few civilians at“G,” Howard
Campaigne, was furious with the Americans as
well as the Soviets. When he learned that ERA’s
electronic bombe project was terminated, he
wrote:’® “If wehad complete coverage [of
Longfellow] from the beginning [1943] we proba-
bly could have been reading their communica-
tions by 1945. Ifwe had supported this by the
analytic machinery recently planned, we could
have broken out most of the available traffic. The
entire story is one of ‘too little too late’. This sys-
tem was in use for five years, yet we were not
ready to read it in quantity until it disappeared.”

GSS. Campaigne would become dis-

“traught. Much, much worse was happening.
*, Perhaps because ofan American defector, by
‘1949 all ofthe four major Soviet cipher systems

that the United States and England had penetrat-
ed were taken off the air.

FS7/St) They were replaced by new

s, machines;, ones too fresh and too protected to be
‘unraveled through operator errors or clandestine

activities. There’seemed little hope of a repeat of
the 1930s when Japan sent messages on old and
new: systems at the same time or when a midnight
visit to a consular office by the ONI could produce
a code hook or insights i into highest level systems.

iS /485-The Soviet problem was not the only
frustration, ‘nor the only danger to the survival of
what became. NSA. By late 1949 began to
tighten its cryptoprocedures, locking out the
British and Americans. By 1952 had done
so much to protect its codes and ciphers that NSA
worried that itwould be permanently barred
from some ofthe most important sources it had
on developments fd *? Even the
Chinese Communists were replacing their simple

additive and transposition codes. They began

 

; Page 267
EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L:.86-36

borrowing much from: the Soviets’ rugged one-
time-pad systems. The North Koreans soon fol-
lowed their mentor’s lead.'®

 

 

 

 

(UC) Without Magic and without Many
Friends

CFS4/SB The crypto crises ofthe late 1940s
came when COMINT was losing many ofits
friends and its independence. Even before “Black
Friday,” when the Soviet systems were changed,
there had been calls for reform, usually motivated
by a search for efficiency. By the early 1950s NSA
was alone, under scrutiny, and threatened.

CFS4/55-Soon after World War II, the SIS and
OP-20-G were ordered to cooperate onthe allo-
cation of targets and the design and purchase of
machines. Then in a general cleansing of military
inefficiencies, the army and navy SIGINT agen-
cies were locked together in1949 to become
the Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA).
Unfortunately, the merger did not go well and
caused many problems. Almost as soon as it was
born, AFSA was criticized because it could not re-
enter the high-level systems and, most signifi-
cantly, because it missed predicting the outbreak
ofthe Korean War! Combined with previous
oversights, such as failing to spot the emergence
ofthe Soviet atomic capability, the Korean over-
sight put centralized SIGINT in danger.

CES4/6h AFSA and American intelligence in

general received ascathing review bythe
Brownell Committee as early as 1950. More than

Page 268

TOP SECRET/ICONINTHREL US AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-Net—

the organizational structure came under fire.
Faith in cryptanalysis was plummeting, so much
so that insiders later called the early 1950s the
“Dark Ages of American Cryptanalysis.”

@S4/S1) The formation ofthe National
Security Agency in 1952 did not reverse the crypt-
analysts’ fortunes. Results remained meager and
SIGINT's reputation suffered. Ifthere had been
viable alternatives, such as penetration of Soviet
systems byhuman agents, NSA might have
become a minor player inthe intelligence field.
Necessity and a powerful director saved it. But
the Agency was never secure in the 1950s.

(&) Although NSA’s tough and effective new
leader, General Ralph Canine, hinted that NSA
might soon be able to “listen into the conversa-
tions of the Polit Bureau,” and was able to secure
budgets that allocated $5,000,000 or more dol-
lars a year for regular analytical equipment, NSA
was not left to itself. *°

€F8778D A year after its birth, NSA was sub-
jected to a series of threatening investigations by
powerful review boards. As soon as one examina-
tion was concluded, another began. While some,
such as the Hoover Commission, held that break-
ing the Soviet ciphers was of paramount impor-
tance, all the evaluations voiced adeep disap-
pointment that an Ultra had not been re-created.

(F855 Asa result, there were calls for a
thorough overhaul of SIGINT. Even some of
NSA’s very best friends, such as William O. Baker,
thought the Agency should bestripped ofthe
responsibility of solving major cryptanalytic sys-
tems.

(IS/48h) The SIGINTers had to prove their
worth. Their only hope was for a technological
and scientific “fix.” Even if they had to continue to
rely upon plaintext intercepts and T/A, new
machines and methods were essential. Code and
cipher breaking needed a technological revolu-

FOP-SEGREHICOMINTHREL-UGA-AUE-CAN-GBR-AND-NaL He
FOP-SEGRETHOCMINFTREL USA AUS -CAN-GBR-AND-NZEH-

tion as well as mathematical breakthroughs. And
NSA needed help to achieve both.

(U) Unfortunately, it had to pull itself up by its
own bootstraps. The American computer indus-
try was too immature to supply what was needed,
and Big Science was paying little attention to
cryptanalysis.

(U) The End of an ERA

¢PS77SD In the late 1940s, as the Soviets shut
down their major systems and when American
SIGINT critically needed technological and scien-
tific help, one of “G’s” most valuable allies, ERA,
almost disappeared. Then, after ERA’s rescue, it
did not return to the role of the always ready and
infinitely flexible partner that Hooper, Wenger,
and Engstrom had envisioned.

(U) By as early as 1949, Engineering Research
Associates (ERA) was experiencing internal prob-
lems and it was becoming a political target. The
challenge of turning science into abusiness was
difficult for the company. InSt. Paul and
Washington internal conflicts were developing.
In addition, ERA’s status as a favored captive cor-
poration came under increasing fire as the Cold
War began to turn computers and applied science
into competitive industries.

(U) By1950, Wenger’s dream ofhaving a
devoted and responsive research and develop-
ment firm, whose talents ranged from advanced
mathematics to computer design, was lost. Ata
critical point, America’s SIGINT organizations
were left without their own “think tank” and
without acomputer company devoted to its
needs.

(U) But in 1947, as ERA was taking shape, it
seemed as if it would become a permanent multi-
purpose research and development arm of “G.” It
had some ofthe world’s most skilled electronics
engineers and even aleading mathematician
cryptanalyst, C.B. Tompkins. Tompkins had a

“TOP-SECRETICOMINTREL-USA_AUG-GAN-GER-AND-NELIDC—

unique mission. He was intent upon creating a
high-level mathematical research branch within
the company. It would fill, he thought, the vacu-
um left when most of the mathematicians in “G”
and the SIS returned to academia and noncrypto-
logic investigations.

(U) Howard Engstrom had alonger agenda.
He hoped that ERA would become the new
embodiment of the Desch-NCML RAM-building
combination that had been socreative and
responsive during the war. But Tompkins and
Engstrom realized that to survive, ERA had to
take on more than what was offered by OP-20-G
and, perhaps, the SIS.

(U) At the company’s birth, that did not seem
threatening. Joseph Wenger thought that ERA’s
special relationship with “G” would always induce
the company to bow to SIGINT needs. But ERA’s
dual role quickly entangled itin aseries of con-
flicts no one had foreseen. Then the creation of
AFSA began to undermine the other side of the
relationship — that ERA could always expect a
steady flow of contracts from the SIGINT com-
munity.

(U) As the early Cold War’s demands began to
pile up on ERA, “G’s” assignments and the com-
pany’s private work came into open conflict. The
conflicts with the Bureau of Ships and some inter-
nal frictions were not the result ofavarice or
greed. In large measure they came about because
oflack of support for applied science before the
Cold War created the science “industry” of the
1950s. ERA began its life ona financial shoe-
string. It had little working capital and, for a time,
survived only because the Bureau agreed to pay it
as stages of projects were completed.

(U) ERA also began with a fear that the navy’s
work would be unable to sustain it. Each ofthe
founding members was urged to search for other
projects. That search developed its own dynamic,
and bythe end of1947 the navy’s contracts

Page 269
FOP-SEGRETHOOMINTHREE-USA AUS -CaAN-CBROANE- NEE —

accounted for less than one-half of ERA’s busi-
ness.

(U) Although that share varied from year to
year, ERA soon had a life of its own and devel-
oped many outside ties and obligations. It joined
with the National Bureau of Standards inthe
search for acommercially viable electronic com-
puter; it gained a prestige contract from the ONR
to survey all computer logic and technology; it
had contracts with the atomic energy agencies; it
was developing civil air control systems; and one
of its divisions was designing sanitary trucks for
airports. ERA even signed an agreement to devel-
opa magnetic drum computer for IBM.” ERA’s
financial guru, John Parker, had to sternly
remind all the ERA men that “G’s” work was and
would remain the company’s first priority.

(U) Throughout 1948 and 1949 the Bureau of
Ships kept up the demands for an end to the spe-
cial relationship between OP-20-G and ERA. The
Bureau was ready to take further steps.**

(U) The pressures compounded the problems
ERA faced as its managers tried to turn a group of
ex-academics and very creative engineers into
businessmen. There were internal disagreements
about ERA’s place in science and arguments also
developed over which projects to support. ERA’s
founders began to drift apart. By late 1949 C. B.
Tompkins departed for amore stable environ-
ment: the NBS’s West Coast applied mathemat-
ics center. Almost as soon as he arrived he began
lobbying for the creation ofa special nonprofit
mathematics “think tank” for cryptanalysis, one
separate from ERA.

(U) Hewas not the only one tofind ERA
inhospitable. Key engineers were leaving to find
positions inthe emerging commercial electronic
computer industry. One of the first men to go was
John Howard. One of the reasons for his depar-
ture was ERA’s rather ill-fated attempt to revive
Bush’s Rapid Selector.

Page 270

(U) Howard was soon followed by other ERA
founders. Even Laurance Safford, who retired
and became aconsultant onstatistical work,
stayed at ERA for only afew months. He found
one of NSA’s new friends, the MELPAR engineer-
ing company, more attractive.

(U) ERA’s Traumas

(U) The grand hopes for ERA in1946 had
turned into frustration for its engineers, as well as
for its managers bythe late 1940s. They never
imagined that defense and civilian work would
come into conflict. ERA’s attempt to build anew
Rapid Selector became a technological, financial,
and managerial nightmare. The engineers could
not make military technology work in a practical
civilian setting, they could not please their .
defense and academic customers atthe same
time, and the Selector project became an eco-
nomic sinkhole for the company.

(U) The resulting tension was intolerable to
many at ERA. John Howard decided to leave in
the summer of 1948. His role in what had become
achaotic and perhaps hopelessly over-budget
project made it difficult for him to stay. He drift-
ed for atime, but became an important member
ofthe team the Burroughs Corporation put
together tolead itinto the computer business.
Ralph Meader left quite soon. John Coombs last-
eda bit longer, then decided to join IBM’s engi-
neering staff.

(U) Financial pressures played a great role in
the troubles at Engineering Research during the
late 1940s. It became increasingly difficult for the
ex-academics and scientists to keep their small
company competitive asmore firms began to
compete inthe expanding military and science-
related computer markets. 74

(U) In addition to the financial pressure, the
drive for efficiency that came with the integration
ofthe communications intelligence agencies also
took its toll. Soon the AFSA demanded contrac-

“FOP-SECREFICCMINTHREE-USA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-AND-NZEH-
—TFOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USAAUSCAN-GBROAND-NZEHE-

tors who knew how to follow bureaucratic proce-
dures and who could survive on low-margin gov-
ernment contracts. Although Joseph Wenger
remained in the highest levels of AFSA and NSA
and was influential in forming their technical and
research policies, he could not protect ERA’s old
special relationship.™

(U) The technology politics of the Cold War
also played a role. In 1950, just as ERA’s leaders
were searching for a financial sponsor to rescue
them, they received abody blow from Drew
Pearson. In his “Washington Merry-Go-Round”
column,” his men exposed the special relation-
ship between ERA and the navy. The criticism led
the navy to take a harder look at the company and
to tell the intelligence agencies to return tothe
bureaucratic way of doing business. The navy’s
auditors, angered over the special open-end con-
tracts with ERA, paid such meticulous attention
to ERA’s internal accounts that bad feelings
developed on both sides.

€fS778H The navy threatened to terminate
much ofthe vital secret work at ERA just as the
Soviet crisis was calling for more, not less, coop-
eration. ERA’s president, John Parker, let loose
some verbal blasts that further eroded the neces-
sary © trust between the navy and the company.
Relations with the navy bureaus soured so much
that Joseph Wenger was unable to arrange for
either a ceremony for or a letter of special thanks
to the ERA engineers who had designed and built
the astounding Atlas computer. IBM’s men did
receive formal thanks for their new work, howev-
er?”

<#8) The reorganization of American SIGINT,
leading to the creation of the AFSA in 1949, then
the NSA in 1952, contributed to the demise of the
special relationship between ERA and the code-
breakers. The integration of the military agencies
brought a shift in who made decisions about com-
puter purchasing. Because of the personnel poli-
cies that had led the SIS to look to civilians while
“G” favored the military, NSA inherited a “com-

FOP-SECRETICOMNTHREL-USAAUS-CAN GBR AND NZDT

puter” staff predominantly composed of those
from the army side of technical SIGINT. They had
different ties and orientations than the few
remaining old navy hands that worked at policy
levels, such asJoe Eachus and James
Pendergrass. Unlike them, the 1950s NSA com-
puter group had grown up within the Agency, had
adeep respect for IBM and its equipment, and
were more “operational” than mathematical
cryptanalysts. Asa result, the new core NSA
group did not protest when the special group that
integrated Agency and ERA work was disbanded.
The 1954 termination ofthe NCML inSt. Paul
went almost unnoticed.

(U) SIGINT Loses Another Friend

CTS77#8H The impact of the frictions with the
bureau and the disillusionment caused by “Black
Friday” were not confined toWenger and the
crew at ERA. Atthe end of his life, Stanford C.
Hooper was disappointed about what had hap-
pened tothe company, to American COMINT,
and to his fight for science and innovation. In par-
ticular, his relationship with Engineering
Research Associates did not end happily. Because
of his views on how the navy should organize
research for the Cold War and his ties to ERA, the
navy’s bureaucracy turned on the man who had
done so much to modernize naval communica-
tions and cryptanalysis.

(U) Once retired, Hooper continued to serve
on many science-related military boards, and his
previous contributions to electronics led to more
civilian accolades. At the same time, he began to
act as a consultant to several small but important
electronics firms.” He also remained in contact
with the SIGINT agencies. As late as 1952 he was
asked toserve onan important NSA advisory
panel on communications. 7?

(U) Hooper became frightened of big business
and discouraged by its attitude toward the needs
ofthe military. He felt betrayed by those he and
the navy and the nation had done so much for.

Page 271
 

“FOP SEGRETHOOMINFIREL—UGiA AUS -GAN-GBR-ANB-NZHIK4—

He was especially hurt by the actions of the com-
pany that he had helped to establish at the end of
World War I, RCA.

(U) Hooper also worried that his old friends,
the academics, would not serve the cause of SIG-
INT. He was alienated by their attempts to stake
claims to a major share of military research fund-
ing and their demands for a vast and centralized
postwar federal agency to mimic the NDRC.

(U) The military bureaucracy received even
more barbed criticism from Hooper. Sadly, he
received some in return. The navy’s bureaus man-
aged a direct slap at him. In the early 1950s, near
the end of his life, he had to undergo a demeaning
questioning of his integrity because of his rela-
tionship with ERA.°°

(U) In 1947 Hooper's ties to ERA’s operations
became direct when he was asked to provide the
kind of guidance he was giving to several other
small electronics companies. His arms-length
role inERA was formalized in1949 when the
company agreed to pay him $3,000 a year to act
as a “technical” consultant.

(U) The relationship pleased everyone until
ERA was purchased bythe giant Remington-
Rand Corporation. Remington had decided to
enter the computer business and to do so before
it could be locked out by its competitor, IBM. In
the early 1950s, Remington strengthened its old
electronic research group, purchased the Eckert
and Mauchly company and the rights to its UNI-
VAC business-oriented computer, and then
bought ERA. Remington valued the cash-hungry
ERA for its scientific computer designs and its
patent rights on magnetic drums and other criti-
cal components. The ERA purchase made those
who had retained ERA stock quite a profit, but
Remington did not follow through on its chance
to remain the world’s leading computer manufac-
turer. Policy decisions, including ones holding
back technological innovations, led many indus-
try observers to characterize the firm as one that

Page 272

was able to“snatch defeat from the jaws of
victory.”

(U) Hooper had opposed the purchase of ERA
by Remington Rand because he wanted ERA to
remain flexible and focused onthe needs of the
intelligence community. Eventually, Hooper
accepted the Remington purchase because there
seemed noother financial alternative and
because he thought that the link to Remington
might have another important bonus. Being tied
to Remington, he wrote, would ease the navy
auditors’ pressures on ERA. Sadly, with the
takeover, the navy intensified its reviews of ERA,
and it began to question Hooper’s connection.

(U) Remington was ordered toshow _ that
Hooper had played a “technical” role. Remington
could not muster the evidence necessary to show
that Hooper had played atechnical role. Asa
result, in 1954 Remington was notified that
Hooper had not been and was not a legitimate
employee of ERA. Therefore, declared the navy’s
attorneys, none ofthe payments to him could be
charged to government contracts.™ That decision
came just a year before Hooper passed away.

(LY) An Old Friend’s Burdens

(U) As ERA and Stanford Hooper began to
face their disappointments, another “G” old-
timer was burdened with the responsibility of try-
ing torescue the fortunes of American crypt-
analysis. The navy’s Earl Stone, who had been a
senior administrator in OP-20-G since World
War II, was asked to head the new Armed Forces
Security Agency. He accepted what became a very
trying job. He had to supervise the bureaucratic
merger of the two services, the SIS and “G,” and,
at the same time, rescue high-level SIGINT.

€FS+45B That was too much toask. Despite -
the help ofthe “greats” of American codebreak-
ing, such as Rowlett, Kullback, Sinkov, Rosen,
Eachus, Campaigne, and even William Friedman,
Stone ended his tenure in mid-1951 without

FOR-GEGRETICGMINGIREL LSA -AWS-CANGBR-AND NZL
FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL USA AUS—CAN-CBR-ANE-NZEE

meeting the Soviet cryptanalytic challenge and
without solving the problem of how to secure sci-
ence’s and industry's help in rescuing American
codebreaking.

 

(U) Frank Rowlett

 

(U) Dr. Abraham Sinkov

€PS) But he had made some progress. With
advice from Joseph Wenger who, although ill,
continued tobe amajor figure inthe SIGINT
organizations, ** Stone was able to do more than
just fend off attacks on his agency. He convinced

“TFOP-SECRETICOMNTHREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZUIXT

America’s politicians that SIGINT funding should
be increased and that previous levels of research
and machine development be continued. And he
encouraged the expansion of methodological and
technical research branches in the agency. Before
heleft, ten percent of AFSA’s workforce was
engaged in some research activity, and the num-
ber of outside consultants, such asthe mathe-
maticians Marshall Hall and C. B. Tompkins, was
increased.

(U) Stone was able to continue AFSA’s role in
exploring exciting, new technological frontiers.
The agency invested in transistor development,
and Stone encouraged the pathbreaking and very
eliciting explorations by “G’s” navy engineer, M.
Scott Blois, into thin-film memory technologies.
That work was a grandfather of microelectronics.

€£$} The research climate under Stone was so
open that the ideas of a young Korean War era
sailor, Dudley Buck, were financed. AFSA began
experiments on extremely low temperature and
ultrafast “cryotron” circuits in its laboratories.**

(PS8778P7 Stone supported mathematical as
well as technological research. As he was ending
his reign, there was an attempt to build a formal
program to attract the brightest and best ofthe
nation’s young mathematicians tothe agency.*
And Stone carried forward the “scientific” adviso-
rygroups that Joseph Wenger had begun after
the war. Driven to find solutions tothe Soviet
problem, he established the Special Cryptologic
Advisory Group (SCAG) and brought in men like
Howard Engstrom and John von Neumann, who,
he thought, would link AFSA to the cutting edge
ideas inindustry and academia. They were to
serve another function. A friendly review board
with a luminary such as William F. Friedman act-
ing as liaison might protect the agency from those
who thought AFSA should turn the Soviet prob-
lem over to an independent and “truly scientific”
organization. *°

Page 273
“TOP SECRETHCOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN CBR AND NECA

€€8//35 Many ofthe members ofthe early
advisory groups were recruited from the ranks of
those who had served cryptanalysis then returned
to industry, such as Joe Desch,®* John Howard,
Ralph Palmer, and IBM’s John C. McPherson. Or
they were old friends such as C. B. Tompkins and
Marshall Hall, who had gone back to academic
life. Although they were all agency connected,
they had at least become “outsiders” with broad-
er contacts than those within the agency.

#37765 And in the early 1950s, the ties of the
science board to industry were acceptable. The
direct link between industry and SIGINT provid-
ed by SCAG was seen as an invaluable benefit to
the agency. Only later would questions of conflict
of interest arise. That impelled NSA to seek more
of its advisors, the likes of Claude Shannon and S.
S. Cairns, from academia.*”

€€) Stone did more than forge abridge to
industry and science. He was able to secure budg-
ets that gave the agency as much money each year
for the purchase, rental, or development of com-
puters and other analytic equipment as had been
spent on all cryptomachines during the first two
years of World War II.°8

€FS#/5H But Stone’s years were marked by
emergencies and cryptanalytic failures. Many of
the ideas for advances in cryptanalytic computers
had to be put aside as the agency desperately tried
to reenter the Soviets’ most important cryptosys-
tems and to adjust to having to become one of the
world’s mightiest data collection and processing
facilities.

(U) A Desperate Search for “Depth”

FS458 Before the Soviet blackout in 1948-
49, the navy and army cryptanalytic groups had
focused onthe development of general-purpose
cryptanalytic machines, such as Goldberg, Sled,
Connie, and the 5202. The work on the electronic
computers, Atlas and Abel, was an extension of
the search for advanced and universal cryptana-

Page 274

lytic engines. Afew costly limited-purpose
machines such as Warlock were designed, and
there was some discussion of finding a replace-
ment for the tabulators for data handling.*? But
until 1949 the army and navy engineers empha-
sized finding a way to automate the most sophis-
ticated general cryptotechniques.

(U) Then priorities had to shift. Old develop-
ment programs, such as those for Atlas and Abel,
were allowed to continue, but dollars were shifted
into creating simple but ultrafast comparators
and into a tragic project to create a data machine
as powerful as 400 tabulators.

<P8//SB- In 1949 the emphasis was put on
machines to “get the job done” rather than on cre-
ating elegant technological innovations. The cen-
tral job of the early 1950s machines for the criti-
cal Soviet problem was to sift through millions of
intercepts, hoping to find any hint as to how the
cipher systems might possibly be attacked. The
search for “depths” was the function ofa new
series of comparators.

€FS>} Machines were not required for complex
mathematical analyses but to find errors in pro-
cedures or weaknesses incipher equipment
designs, The devices did not have to be very intel-
ligent, nor did they have to be multipurpose. But
they had to be fast — fast enough to perform mas-
sive searches.

CESS No machine in AFSA or anywhere
else was upto the challenges of 1949. To search
through less than a single week's traffic from the
one important Soviet system that had remained
onthe air, Albatross, would have called for
166,000 hours onthe World War Il 7omm
Comparator. Even the advanced 5202 compara-
tor was much too slow.*° Anew series of com-
parators had to be created, and quickly.

~€FS44SH In early 1950 ERA was told to rush
the design and manufacture ofa machine that
would be able to search a day’s worth of Albatross

-FOP-GEGRETICOMINTHREL-U6A-AUE-GAN-GBR-AND Net
FOP-SECRETHECOMINTHREL-USA-AUG-CAN-GBR-AND-NZL—

traffic inone week. The group inSt. Paul put
other projects on hold as it tried to meet the goal.
Two machines were hurriedly put together in four
months, then shipped to Washington. They were
called Robins because they performed the round
robin attack. Their speed was impressive
although they reached only one-third ofthe rate
that had been requested.

€£6+45B By looping two punched paper tapes,
with one ten characters shorter than the other,
and running them at thirty miles an hour past an
improved photoelectric reader, 5,000 characters
asecond were read, and ten characters at a time
were tested for simple IC coincidences. Because
one tape loop was shorter than the other, the
machine never had to stop or mechanically shift a
tape. The improved electronic counters and cir-
cuits signaled when a threshold had been reached
and punched an IBM card with identifications of
the positions ofthe tapes without stopping the
machine.

FS#/S5 The first two Robins impressed the
“eryppies.” Solomon Kullback wanted forty of
them, but financial constraints led to ERA being
told to manufacture only adozen copies, but as
soon as possible. ERA worked some manufactur-
ing miracles. Within a year fifteen Robins were
running two shifts aday in Washington. That
continued for half adecade asone million
Albatross messages were run against each other.
The result was tragic, however. Only 138 “busts”
were located, and Albatross remained unex-
ploitable.”

€F3/7/SB The Robins were only the first ofa
string of 1950s specialized comparators fast
enough for the job of seeking the weaknesses in
the tough cryptosystems. Every advanced tech-
nology was explored. When time allowed, some of
the new machines were given complex architec-
tures that provided flexibility. But speed was the
goal. The 1950s comparators were, atthe very
minimum, three hundred times faster than the
NCR-Gray Comparator of World War II. Several

-LOP SECRETIUCOMINT/RE! USA AUS CAN GBR AND NZLUX4

different companies contributed to this series of
Comparator variations.

LES+/8D In fact, by the early 1950s, the com-
parator initiative shifted away from ERA and the
old navy group within the agency. The army’s
cryptotechnicians and AFSA’s contractors guided
developments after the first Robins had been
delivered.

S444) But even before “Black Friday’s” full
impact, the army group had begun its own new
comparator project. Itcalled onits old friend
Technitrol to put delay lines and magnetic
tapes together to create the late 1940s generation
of all-purpose comparators. But what had been
planned asa long-term project for aseries of
ever more powerful machines turned into a rather
hurried production of variations of more simple

round-robin IC searchers. ‘They were needed
to meet the Soviet and new
The results were impressive, however. e€

Ciceros proved valuable for more than a decade
and advanced the technology of magnetic tapes
and their drive mechanisms. They also demon-
strated how multiple memories could speed
processing. * i

 

¢£5//5B Another high-speed, delay-line and
tape depth searcher was Della. It could make
10,000,000 simple tests asecond and compare
1,000 messages atall . positions in seventeen
hours.*3 Technitrol’s_Vivian_ series, which was
designed to help on was to
include a machine with a magnetic core memory,
one ofthe first uses of that technology, but that
was abandoned as too: time-consuming.

 

 

 

€£87/84) To rush. delivery ofa machine that
could perform a parity bias attack, one ofthe
Vivians was constructed bya new friend of the
Agency, Denver Research. It was also asked to
construct the important transistorized successors
toHecate,[~ ———si&erib machine. Those two
Murdocks cost NSA-three quarters ofa million
EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L. 86-36

Page 275
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL- USA, AUS-CAN GBR AND NZD —

dollars.** Another small company was called on
inthe 1950s for an ambitious project for a
machine for locating and tallying group coinci-
dences. An improved Connie that cost more than
$650,000 was built by National Union Radio.*

€F3//55 Perhaps the most impressive of the
new comparators was Duchess, another machine
that was intended to be part ofa long-term pro-
gram. It was designed totackle additive-pad
problems to hopefully point tokey reuse. It
replaced the interim machines Countess,
Mistress, and Consort. They had been too slow to
re-create a new Venona-like triumph.**

CES445_H Completed byIBM inthe mid-
1950s, Duchess contained several magnetic
drums, helping itto perform asmany as
1,000,000 subtractions, weightings, and thresh-
old tests an hour. It cost over $700,000, but that
seemed a bargain ifit could conquer any of the
frustrating one-time-pad systems used bythe
Soviets and their allies.

S46) Unfortunately, the new comparators
were not providing immediate solutions. The
Soviet machine and high-level hand systems

remained impenetrable, and the wisely used
[proved as stubborn. Plain text
and T/A and the tiny “facts” that came from lower

level systems were what was yielding information
to AFSA and NSA, but the agencies were becom-
ing overwhelmed by all those disparate “facts.”

(U) Earl Stone listened to the complaints of
his machine staff, then gave them the signal to
begin a project that had a very, very grand objec-
tive: to build one ultrafast data machine that
would be more powerful than the hundreds of
tabulators the agency was operating.

(U) His decision to launch the Nomad project
led to “the” great defeat among NSA’s early com-
puter efforts. Millions of dollars went for nothing
because of the chaos inthe American computer

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)
Page 276

industry and because ofthe cryptocrisis of the
early 1950s.

(UC) Wanderers and Nomads and Chaos

€F8//8t) Vannevar Bush had not been alone
in hoping for amachine toreplace the electro-
mechanical tabulator. Assoon as World War II
ended, OP-20-G used some Monogram funds to
explore the logic of high-speed sorting, one of the
most important functions in cryptanalysis and
data handling.*” Soon, an SIS team joined into
try to establish the logical basis for replacing the
punch card.** Despite great hopes, it was realized
that while the technology for mathematical
machines such as Atlas was at the threshold, the
hardware demanded by a data manipulation rev-
olution was something for the future.

(S} ERA’s mathematicians continued their
investigations of sorting, dispelling worries about
losing data when it wandered around during
sorts, but that was about all that was accom-
plished inthe early stages of what came to be
called the Nomad Project.*?

€§}-The “memory” problem had defeated the
first stages of Nomad. In 1948 file technologies,
such as magnetic tapes, appeared to have too
many problems to be overcome, even for IBM’s
team led by Ralph Palmer. Printers tokeep up
with electronic data machines were also ina dis-
tant and very expensive future.°°

<8) As a result, the early Nomad goal of a data
computer 1,000 times more powerful than a tab-
ulator or sorter was turned into nothing more
than arather speculative design project at ERA.
Its engineers laid out aplan for an electronic
computer that concentrated on sorting, collating,
and other data handling tasks. Their Nomad was
to have magnetic drums and some other high-
speed memory to act as servers for a huge mag-
netic tape system, PIT. It was to hold the equiva-
lent of 2,000,000 IBM cards. That PIT tape sys-
tem was divided into four units, each of which

—~LOR-SECRETHICOMNTIREL-UShAG-CAN-CBR ANE NEEHXT~
“TOP SECRETICOMININREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZEHAT

would deliver data tothe computer’s processor
automatically. In addition tothe data handling
and sorting features, Nomad was to have a set of
basic cryptanalytic orders and a special architec-
ture to speed their execution.

tPSH/SH Howard Campaigne and the others
at “G” who were overseeing the project realized
how speculative it was. They knew the Nomad
concept was for the future. Even if they obtained
the help ofother government agencies, the
machines’ development would cost $5,000,000
and take seven years.™ That was too much time
and money, and Nomad began to wither. Some
attempt was made to begin detail designs, but
ERA became too busy with its emergency proj-
ects.

(TS77SP Then, another life for Nomad
seemed possible. A preliminary research agree-
ment was made with the NBS and the air force in
mid-1949. A young navy engineer was sent to the
NBS towork onthe first stages of machine
design.** Not much came of those explorations,
however. The tapes and their drives continued to
bestubborn and the cost ofsuch a machine
seemed prohibitive.

(U) The idea seemed to be laid to a final rest,
but in 1950 the crisis at AFSA led Earl Stone to
agree to find the millions necessary to create a
data processing revolution. Ifhis staff, led by
those from the SIS side of the agency, succeeded,
AFSA would be the first inthe world to have a
massive data computer.

(U) The designs from ERA were dusted off
and updated, and arequest for a proposal was
publicized in 1950. The proposal specified func-
tions to be performed rather than hardware, but
everyone knew that the mass memory demands
would call for very advanced tape systems. After
ayear, acontract was signed. It was the largest
single computer contract the SIGINT agencies
had let since the Bombe project.

TOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL-USAAUS--CAN-CBR-AND NZL

(U) The cost ofthe proposed machine was
high but acceptable, especially to those who had
lost faith in a heroic cryptanalytic future for SIG-
INT. The overwhelming processing demands that
centralized noncryptanalytic “intelligence” would
require could be met only with new and revolu-
tionary input and file technologies.

657456 There already was a need for such a
technological revolution, and it was reaching a
critical level. The amount of data reaching the
Agency grew exponentially. By 1955 there was a
torrent of “noninformation” flowing into NSA.
The United States had more than 2,000 round-
the-clock listening positions that were sending
thirty-seven TONS ofintercept material to NSA
each month. Inaddition, some 30,000,000
words of intercept were sent by teletype. *

C84/SB- The data overload grew with every
year and every Soviet challenge. NSA’s posts were
intercepting 2,000,000 messages a month from
just one Soviet system, and the vast majority of
that was plain text. And NSA’s T/A section was
processing more than 3,000,000,000 groups a
year. Within a short time, punching 1,000,000
IBM cards amonth for just one problem was
common. Bythe late 1950s the Soviet

roblem alone was generating 15,000."
magnetic tapes per month. ‘

(TS7/SH The other nations ofthe world
were contributing their share. China genérated
250,000 enciphered messages a year, matching
the number of coded intercepts from the rest of
the world. Plaintext numbers were much
greater.>° ‘

(U) All that data had to be changed into a use-
ful, ifnot standard, format, examined for rele-
vance, sorted and merged, and routed to the ana-
lysts who attempted toturn the minute bits of
data into intelligence. Even in the early 1950s the
burden was becoming too much for hand and tab-
ulator processing. NSA could not hire and train

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)
Page 277
TOP SECRETICOMINTTREL” USA, AUS CAN-GBR-ANE-NEL HE

enough people, and electromechanical machinery
seemed unable to meet the challenge.*”

(U) The risky gamble on Nomad seemed
inescapable. The system was to cost atleast as
much as six orseven Atlas or Abner computers
and would probably make the company that cre-
ated itthe world’s leader inthe manufacture of
computers that were able to match the needs of
business and bureaucracy. Although the Nomad
design emphasized somewhat special-purpose
sorting and data manipulation, the chance it pro-
vided to create new mass memory systems was
very attractive.

(U) The Nomad contract was a great prize,
and in some ways more important to the comput-
er industry than the massive Sage early-warning
computer project that IBM was taking on.

(U) If You Can’t Trust Someone from the
Adams Family, Then ...

(U) Surprisingly, the late 1951 letter of intent
for the huge data machine did not go to ERA, or
even IBM, but to Raytheon, the company that had
caused the army such frustration during the
design and construction of Abner. Because of its
earlier Nomad design work, ERA was the logical
choice for the great project. But the emergence of
AFSA’s bureaucracy, the earlier political tussles
that had weakened the special relationship with
ERA, and its being in the process of total absorp-
tion into Remington-Rand made ita noncon-
tender.

454/55-In fact, ERA was already being
pushed to the side by its new owner and the SIG-
INT community. Only one major new AFSA or
NSA computer contract was awarded to ERA
until later in the decade.** Luckily, just after the
Nomad award, the navy gave Remington-
Rand/ERA acontract todevelop acomputer
using the exciting and revolutionary new transis-
tor inplace oftubes. That would have a later

Page 278

impact on NSA’s computer and communications
capabilities. ©°

(U) The other likely winner of the contract,
IBM, apparently did not make aserious attempt
to take on Nomad. Although very worried by the
UNIVAC computer, IBM’s upper management
was hesitant about putting too much effort into
electronics. In addition, its own magnetic tape
project faced continuing difficulties, and there
were worries that government contracts would
lead to the company’s patents being threatened.
IBM had a tradition of doing everything possible
to protect itself.

(U) One tactic was to perform enough work
ona technology before taking a contract to pre-
vent developments financed by federal contracts
from undermining patent claims. There may have
been another reason. IBM had an overflowing
plate. The computer advocates within the compa-
ny had used the Korean crisis as leverage to con-
vince Tom Watson to allow them to design and
build the special NORC computer for the Naval
Ordnance laboratory and, in a separate project, to
create the Defense Calculator (IBM 701) to sell to
agencies such as the AEC and NSA. All that taxed
IBM’s engineering staff and made the company’s
management quite worried about wasting men
and money on additional speculative projects.**

(U) Raytheon was not awarded the Nomad
contract by simple default, however.°? The com-
pany had become well known and respected. And
it was connected to New England’s financial and
industrial community. Its chief executive was of
the famous presidential, intellectual Adams fami-
ly. And its staff seemed worthy ofthe trust that
had to go with a cost plus fixed-fee contract. The
tape drives they had developed for Abner and the
glowing reputation ofits lead engineers made
AFSA’s team think they had selected the best
firm. In addition, Raytheon’s proposal was strong
enough to allow a waiver of the usual requirement
that a government agency accept the lowest bid.
TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL-UGA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-AND.NZLUX1

+S} Raytheon’s plan was very attractive. It
met all the demands ofthe ERA’s plans.
Raytheon’s machine was to have a large central
memory. Itwas toprovide fast access to
180,000,000 characters, about the amount of
data that 2,300,000 IBM cards could hold. An
innovative basic “stack” architecture was to speed
data access by avoiding the need to determine
and specify addresses. The central computer used
vacuum tubes, but its speed was enhanced by
having athirty-six-bit word transferred and
worked on in parallel.°? Raytheon chose a three-
address instruction tomake memory fetches
rapid. However, because of the special orienta-
tion of Nomad, the ultrafast main memory was
limited to 1,024 words.

<8) Raytheon proposed touse glass delay
lines for the main and fast buffer memories and a
special three-inch tape for the PIT system. The
tape system was very challenging. The vacuum
column component that made stopping and start-
ing tapes safe, as well as fast, and that would win
so many sales for IBM, was yet to be invented. ™
Raytheon had experimented with many ways to
reduce the start/stop time for the tapes and to
minimize the debilitating strain onthem. One
pragmatic and unique part of their solution was a
proposal to read and write onthe tapes in both
directions. Another was a special laminated tape
that could handle stress and also serve as part of
the tape drives’ essential clutch system. The tapes
had a layer of mylar, then a layer of metal, then a
layer of mylar with oxide coating.

€FS7/SB-The company promised to use inno-
vative, pulse-position fast circuitry and to include
aset of instructions tailored to AFSA’s needs.
They were to make sorting, collating, and modu-
lar arithmetic quite rapid and easy to program. ©
But Nomad was not to be a special cryptanalytic
machine. Streaming units and the like were left to
Sled and Abner.

(U) Work on Nomad began in late 1951 with
generous expenditures of manpower and money.

TOP-SECRETHCOHINTHREL-USA_AUS--CAN-CBRAND-NZEHE—

The AFSA stood ready to write a $1,000,000
check for the initial work and expected to send a
similar amount to Waltham for each of the next
three years or more. Although the agency knew
Raytheon was working atthe edge of computer
technology, itthought its stable but innovative
engineering team would conquer any problems.

(U) Very soon, however, AFSA’s men sensed
their expectations were not going to be met. They
were correct. The Nomad project quickly became
ademonstration of how little AFSA-NSA could
depend on outsiders. Everything from manage-
ment and technology to attitudes turned Nomad
into a project nightmare.

(U) Some of the problems may have been due
tothe AFSA’s shifting requirements and its
acceptance of promises that major technological
leaps could be achieved at minimal cost. Others
were the result ofthe difficulty of attempting to
do secret work in a corporate setting. But most of
the problems were the price of the disorder in the
computer industry of the 1950s.

CES/48B- Raytheon had begun to organize its
project team and toexplore its technological
options well before the final contract for Nomad
was signed inMay 1952. Raytheon’s best and
brightest were assigned tothe work. They
received help from friends of SIGINT such as
Dudley Buck and continuing advice from ERA.
Unfortunately, ERA continued to refine and mod-
ify its designs, doing so into 1953.” The design
changes made it difficult for Raytheon to begin
the actual construction process and led to
demands for increased payments for the
machine.

(U) Some of the attempts to make Nomad a
beyond-the-state-of-art machine created delays.
The decision to use magnetic cores rather than
delay-lines for the fast memories led to some
dead-end explorations; the work on pulse-posi-
tion circuitry ate up months; complex circuits to
check and recheck the validity of data flows were

Page 279
FOR-SEGRET/COMATIREL-USA_AUS CAN.GBR.AND.NZUUXL

designed, then abandoned as too expensive; and
then itbegan tobe realized that the acronym
“PIT” had become a much too accurate descrip-
tion of the magnetic tape development project.

(U) NSA had not closely supervised the
Raytheon group, partially because the Agency
was too short-handed to be able to assign a per-
manent overseer to Waltham. Thus, when hints
of problems reached Washington during the pro-
ject’s first year, they did not cause alarm. By mid-
1953 the technical and managerial difficulties
were obvious, however. NSA teams began to visit
the Raytheon site; then a rather typical Cold War
problem almost brought the project to a complete
halt.

€PS77/8H Naval security discovered that the
wife of one of the lead Nomad engineers had rel-
atives who were in powerful positions in the
Chinese Communist Party, and the engineer still
had close relatives living in China. His clearance
was revoked.

CESA/S5 At almost the same time, Raytheon
encountered some financial problems. That led to
a greater role for its accounting department in the
Nomad project. The company could no longer
afford to subsidize any part of the work. Then the
accountants declared that Raytheon deserved
much more than the government had expected to
pay. The NSA’s Nomad sponsors became out-
raged over that and the delays inthe project.
There was a diplomatic but very pointed request
that Raytheon’s “big brass” come to Washington
for a review of the situation.

CFS/H/SB Just as that was being arranged, the
chief engineers atthe company had a serious
falling out. Atthe end ofthe year, several
resigned, taking much of the talent in the compa-
ny with them.” That truly worried those in NSA
who were responsible for Nomad. The anxiety
turned into anger when Raytheon requested pre-
payments to continue the work.

Page 280

(457/5-The attempts by Raytheon’s CEO, C.
F. Adams, tocalm NSA during his Washington
visit, did not suffice. A formal review of the proj-
ect was conducted, and areport was made to
NSA’s director. That report and the discussions
among the Agency's computer experts led toa
recommendation that an excuse be found to can-
cel the contract and bring the PIT work to
Washington. In mid-1954 it was announced that
Raytheon’s Nomad had fallen too far below the
technological curve to be worthwhile. ”°

GSAS A prototype of PIT was shipped to
NSA, and alarge final check was sent to
Massachusetts. Alater accounting indicated that
the prototype, the only lasting contribution of the
Nomad project, had cost NSA $3,250,000.”

(Y) Failure upon Failure

€FS}/5R In 1954 NSA was left without its
grand “data” machine, and Raytheon went in
search of an ally to underwrite its sagging com-
puter effort.” The company found a sponsor, the
Honeywell Corporation, but NSA was left adrift
with a great deal of worry that the Nomad failure
would make itimpossible for the Agency to
mount any more grand computer efforts. NSA
was failing in its assault against its important tar-
get, and ithad failed inits greatest computer
effort.

(U) Agreat deal of faith in the Agency and in
technology was needed.

Notes

14254455 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “NSASAB
Meeting,” 19-20 May 1960.

2. (£54/6% NSA AHA ACC 46406, “Recommend-
ation for a Full-Scale Attack on Russian High Level
Systems,” 2 May 1956.

3. 3) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ware on NSASAB
Mathematics Panel, 9 January 1067.

4445/7841 NSA CCH Series XII Z, draft copies of
Michael L. Peterson, “The Bourbon Problem.”

“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USA, AUS, CAN-CBR-AND-NZEE-
€£57/S9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, S-2733, “Longfellow,
History of,” by Howard Campaigne, June 1948.

5. (97485 NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series
IVE.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of COMINT
Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957. This source pic-

tures the device as quite like the WWII German tele- -

type machines, but other sources indicate
type attack was most useful.

6. 4454/81 NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series
IV E.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of COMINT
Production, 1946-1949,” April, 1957, 106.

7.(46) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.”

8. ($5) NSA CCH Series IV W.1.5.12, “General
History of OP-20-3-GYP,” nd, 108.

9. S458 NSA CCH Series XII Z, draft copies of
Michael L. Peterson, “The Bourbon Problem.”
€?3778H) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA Series IV
E.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of COMINT
Production, 1946-1949,” April 1957. FS} NSA AHA
ACC 7808, “Monogram Report,” 29 November 1949.
¢487/S5P NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Longfellow, History
of,” N-31 to 20-L, June 1948.

10. GS4Sh) NSA AHA ACC 1485, “Analytic
Machine Aids Panel Meeting, 9 February 1949.”
(#37/SB NSA CCH Series XII Zand CCH Computer
History Box, OP-20-G “War Diary Reports: March 1,
1943-May 31, 1948,” August 1945. 484455) NSA CCH

Series XII Z,“Provessing of]

Material By IBM Equipment,” 7 May 1948.

11.-€F5) NSA CCH Series XII Z,A. M. Gleason,
“Inversion of Matrices with O'Malley,” 1948-€FS7/68
NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Joint Long Term Program”
(Old Planning Material, 1948-1949) compiled by Doug
Hogan. (FS*48H NSA AHA ACC 16093,
“Rehabilitation of Bombe Equipments 1951-58.”

12. €F54/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z, Michael D.
Peterson, “Bourbon to Black Friday: The Soviet
COMINT Problem, 1945-1948.”

13. 3 NSA CCH Series XIK Box 8, Snyder,
“Yearly Cost of Representative NSA Machines,” May
1955. The machine as constructed in 1948.

14. CES) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Report of the
Second Computer Study Group,” in NSA Technical
Journal, XIX (Winter 1974), 21-61. (F587) NSA CCH

—TOP-SECRETHECCHINTHREL-USA_AUS-GAN-GBRANB-NZEHH

PLL. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

Series XII 2, “Office of Computers, List of Computers,”
nd.

15.. 468) NSA CCH Series XI Z, $-2733,
“Longfellow, History of,” by Howard Campaigne, June
1948. 48 NSA CCH Series XHI Z, “Report of the
Second Computer Study Group,” as in, NSA Technical
Journal, XIX (Winter 1974), 21-61. (TS) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, file folder, “Monogram and RAM Panel
Reports, 1945-1949.” (FS4#61) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Office of Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

16. (#8) NSA CCH. Series XII Z, S-2733,
“Longfellow, History of,” by Howard Campaigne, June
1948.

17. (FS NSA CCH Series XII Z,“General and
Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986. 8} NSA CCH
Series XII Z,NSA-314, “BISON,” February 1955.
¢?5//SB- (Laconic--Neeo) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical
Cryptanalysis,” August 1985. 48481) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, NSA, [—__—_] Modification,” 4 March
1953. €FS7/S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA-712,

March 1953. €877/8H) NSA CCH Series
XII Z__} “STURGEON,” 15 February
1954. (F851) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Mechanization
in Support of COMINT, Phase H,” circa 1955.

18. €75775H) NSA CCH Series XII Zand AHA
Series 1V E.1.1, George Howe, “Historical Study of
COMINT Production, 1946-1949,” April, 1957.

19. &S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General and

 

* Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
‘Some Lessons Learned, ” 23 May 1986. (Hogan).

20. (6) NSA CCH Series XII Z,AFSA, “R&D
Personnel Plan: FY 1950-52,” 13 October 1952.

21. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
2015,.Unprocessed Remington Rand/ERA materials,
ERA Minute books 1946-50, and Accession 1825,
September 26, 1950, “Announcement of IBM
Contract.”, i

22. (U). NSA RAM File: July 20, 1946, Engstrom-
BuShips, “Use Naval laboratories, not ERA’; August
12, 1946, BuShip$-ERA “DC Office not legal, no plane
allowed”; and July 26, 1948, BuShips toERA, “All
work to be done:in St. Paul.”

EO 3.3(h)(2)
P.L. 86-36

 

Page 281
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL USA, AUS,-CAN-GBRUAND-NZE

23. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy:
Vannevar Bush, Ultra and the Other Memex
(Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, 1994).

24. &) NSA CCH Personalities File, Joseph
Wenger.

25. (U) Washington Post, August 16, 1950.

26. (U) Library of Congress, Papers of Stanford
Caldwell Hooper, Box 23, “Page #211 attached to letter
to Rumbles of Remington-Rand, August 25, 1952.

27. (U) The NCML in St. Paul was formally ended
in 1954, putting a final stamp to the end of the special
relationship. Apparently, ERA was not awarded any
major contracts, except for the Bogart computers,
from 1952 until late in the decade.

28. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy,
371-6.

29. &S) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “Members of NSA
Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,”
circa 1953.

30. (U) Colin Burke, Information and Secrecy,
375:

31. (U) Hagley Museum and Library, Accession
2015, Unprocessed ERA materials, Remington-Rand
General Counsel to ERA, St. Paul, February 16, 1954.

32.48 NSA CCH Office Files, Personality Profiles.

33. 4S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,file folder,
“Monogram and RAM Panel Reports, 1945-1949.”
(U) Emerson W. Pugh, Lyle R. Johnson, and John H.
Palmer, IBM’s 360 and Early 370 Systems
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1991), 451-2.

34. €£8445}) Andy Gleason and Marshall Halli,
called back into the Agency for the Korean conflict,
began aJunior Mathematician program and began
recruiting for it. Unfortunately, the program attracted
only afew men and was not continued. (457/81)
(Eeeonte—Neeen) NSA CCH Series XII Z,Glenn F.
Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,”
August 1985

35. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” 1 June 1965.-€F5} NSA
AHA ACC 28690, “NSA SAB Members and Minutes,”
27 April 1954. Note that C. B. Tompkins and Howard
Engstrom were among those who were calling for such
anindependent “academic” organization. Stanford
Hooper’s ideas on such an extension of his early plea
for science remain unknown. 484465 NSA CCH

Page 282

Series XII Z, “Statement of Task priorities for SCAG,”
12September 1951. €F5) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Abbreviated History of SCAG,” February 1951-
February 1952.

36. (U) Joe Desch was asked to become research
director for “G” but declined the position. However,
he continued to serve SIGINT for the rest of his career.
He became head of NCR’s military division and served
on many advisory boards.

37. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” 1June 1965. SS)
NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Statement of Task priorities
for SCAG,” 12September 1951. ($3) NSA AHA ACC
28690, “NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,”
October 1956. f[6071]. In1953 SCAG’s name was
changed to “Scientific Advisory Board,” and more aca-
demics were recruited.

38. (} NSA CCH Series XII Z, AFSA
Personnel Plan FY 1950-52,” 13 October 1952.

39. (U) Like other organizations, the Agency did
not replace its tabs until the 1960s when small com-
puters such as the IBM 1401 were available. The 1401
was “the” computer substitute for the tabs because of
its low cost, its ability to mimic tab procedures, and its
high-speed printer. The Agency was one of the first to
use the 1401s and had adozen of them by 1962. NSA
CCH Series XIH Box 12, Tordella, NSA General-
Purpose Electronic Computers.

40. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z, List of Machines
and Targets.

41.-4F8445B NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of

Computers, List of Computers,” nd. @SA8}-CLacenic,
Nocan) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty
Years of Mathematical Cryptanalysis,” August 1985.
+6} NSA CCH Series XII Z,ERA, “Robin Progress
Reports,” 1 August to1 October 1952. 48,4485 NSA
CCH Series XII Z, AFSA21 “Summary ofthe Early
Operation of the Robin Machinery,” 19 May 1951.

42. (T8778 NSA CCH Series XII Z, James _L.
Sapp, “The Analytic Machines,” circa 1955.

43. 4S44SB NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

44. (TSA/SQ (Laconie—Neeon) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, Glenn F.Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical
Cryptanalysis,” August 1985, 42 (FS44S4) NSA CCH

“R&D

—FOP-SECRETHCOMINTIREL-USAAUS--CAN-GBROAND-NZEHI-
“TOP-SECRETICOMNTIREL USA, AUS_CAN GBR AND NZEIAT—

Series XII Z, “Office of Computers, List of Computers,”
nd.

45. (484458 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. (C) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Herbert W. Worden,” EDP Machine
History.”

46. 6S) NSA CCH Series XIK Box 8, Snyder,
“Yearly Cost of Representative NSA Machines,” May
1955. &S-/SH NSA CCH Series XII Z, James L. Sapp,
“The Analytic Machines,” circa 1955. GSAS NSA
CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H. Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic
Machines in NSA,” 30 May 1953, and various years.
(ES) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Sam Snyder, draft copy of
“Pre-Computer Machines in Support of
Cryptanalysis,” circa February 1978.

47. <8) NSA AHA ACC 8252, OP-20-G,
“Communications Intelligence Research Plans, 1948,”
7 April 1947.

48. £54451) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Joint Long
Term Program” (Old Planning Material, 1948-1949)
compiled by Doug Hogan. GS4485 NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “File Kept byDr. Campaigne on Ram Panel
Meetings.”

49. (U) The sorting explorations continued on for
some time with work even being done at “G's” tab
room. €§} NSA CCH Series XII Z, ERA A. E. Roberts,
“An Experiment inthe Rearrangment of Data
(Sweater),” (Sorting, Nomad) 1 May 1950.

50. (U) Charles J.Bashe, etal, JBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), Chpt.
4.

51. €65> NSA CCH Series XII Z,“General and
Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986. (Hogan)
(S44SB NSA CCH Series XII Z, “File Kept by Dr.
Campaigne on Ram Panel Meetings.”

52. GS445— NSA CCH Series XII Z, and, CCH
Computer History Box, OP-20-G “War Diary Reports:
March 1, 1943 -May 31, 1948.”

53. 4S} The air force connection may have been
part of the project later taken on by RCA in one of its
first entries into the computer industry, its huge data
processing tape machine, BIZMAC.

54. GS45— NSA CCH Series XH Z,
“Mechanization inSupport of COMINT, Phase II,”
circa 1955. (#8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General and

—FOP-GEGREFIGOMHFHREL-USA-AUS--GAN-GERANS NZL —

Special Purpose Computers; A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986. (Hogan)

55. CSASI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Mechanization inSupport of COMINT, Phase II,”
circa 1955.

56. €ES+/SI) NSA CCH Series XII Z,

“Mechanization in Support of COMINT, Phase IT,”
circa 1955.

57. (U) The electronic computers at NSA, such as
Abner and Atlas did not displace the “tab.” Hundreds
of them were used in the Agency during the 1950s.

58. (U) IBM became involved in the Sage project in
late 1952, and by 1953 it was a major effort within the
firm leading to the production of almost fifty massive
computer/communications systems. Charles J. Bashe,
et al., IBM’s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT
Press, 1986), 244.

59. (U) The contract was for the very important
Bogart computers for editing incoming information.
The young Seymour Cray was the architect. ERA con-
tinued on with its 1103 deliveries to the Agency.

60. £84454) The transistor contract of 1952 was
NOBS 5750. NSA would return to Remington-
Rand/ERA with the Bogart request and then with the
emergency request toconstruct the Blueplate
machine, an assignment that was extremely demand-
ing. &S443H NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The Shearman
Complex: Part VII,” Prepared by James L. Sapp, C425,
circa 1960. CFS5+/51) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSA,
“MPRO Technical Reports,” circa 1956. Although it
emerged in the laboratory shortly after World War II,
and had been nurtured by giants such as Bell Labs and
RCA, the transistor remained very expensive and
unreliable. However, the emergence ofthe junction
transistor and new production methods inthe early
1950s signaled that it might soon replace the vacuum
tube in computers.

61. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 132,
134, 135, 158.

62. (U) The final contract was signed May 1952.

63. && NSA CCH Series XII Z,“General and
Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986, (Hogan), 2-4.

64. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 209.

Page 283
FOP-GECRETHECMINTHREL-USAAUS-CAN-GBR AND NZEPHT-

65. (P38) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General and
Special Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986, (Hogan) 2-6.

66. GS448B NSA CCH Series XI K, Diaries of
Samuel S.Snyder. (8) NSA Technical Literature
Series, Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-
Purpose Electronic Digital Computers, 1964, 20.

67. GS4455 NSA CCH Series XIK, Diaries of
Samuel S. Snyder, June 1953 and August 20, 1953.

68. (284465 NSA CCH Series XIK, Diaries of
Samuel S. Snyder, 31 July 1953.

69. €F84+455 NSA CCH Series XIK, Diaries of
Samuel S. Snyder, 16 January 1953.

70. (S4/8T) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 73.

71. @) NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 20.

72. (U) Honeywell agreed to a joint program.

Page 284 —FOR-GEGREHIGOMHFTHREL UGH AUS-CAN-GBR ANE NZEIAT
FOP-SEGRETICOMINFHREE-USA-AUS; CAN GBR AND NZEHAT

Chapter 10

(U) A Matter of Faith

 

 

 

 

(U) Would Science or an Old Tactician Save
the Agency?

GSHSH The Nomad debacle occurred as
NSA was under siege. The Raytheon effort proved
an embarrassing failure just as a round of threat-
ening inquiries into NSA and the American intel-
ligence community began.* NSA was under
intense pressure because the Agency was letting
America down. There were more than questions
being raised about the Agency’s Soviet effort.

(IS+48t) Almost asthreatening to NSA’s
future as the continued Soviet high-level blackout
was what its critics thought was its inability to
develop and employ science and high technology.
The Cold War was ahigh-tech war, but NSA
seemed incapable of achieving what Hooper had
demanded inthe 1930s, the integration of
advanced science and technology into SIGINT.*

(U) NSA was almost confined to a very minor
role in American intelligence. It came even closer
to losing much of its independence. But it found a
savior, the determined and politically savvy
Ralph J. Canine, the new Agency’s first director.*
Aregular army man in his mid-50s, Canine had
anenergetic and straightforward management
style, but also a willingness to trust the judgments
of his subordinates. Very important, he was an
astute bureaucratic infighter; he blended the
determination of a George Patton with the ability
to relate to others. He knew how to deal with his
superiors as well as his staff.

BS Asa_ result, in mid-1953, when the
National Security Council began investigating the
nation’s strategic vulnerabilities, Canine was able
to fend off its attempt to interfere in NSA’s most
secret internal affairs. To protect the Agency and
its secrets, Canine formed his own review com-

—FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTHREL HOA -AUS-CAN-OBR-AND-NZETE O 3.3(h)(2)

mittee and filled it with NSA’s good friends from
the new version of SCAG, the NSA Scientific -
Advisory Board (SAB). Chaired byDr. H. P.
Robertson ofthe California Institute of
Technology, the committee’s findings were quite
positive and, not surprisingly, fit with the plans
and orientations of NSA’s staff. Because of
Robertson, NSA kept its independence and
another chance at being a high technology inno-
vator.

(PS) Wisely, Robertson’s report did not dwell
on the high-level cryptanalytic failures; rather, it
saluted NSA’s plain language-T/A_ efforts.
Robertson called for more ofthem and for the
resources needed to extend its reach into voice
intercept. But the recognition of the importance
ofthe noncryptanalytic functions was not accom-
panied by cryptanalytic defeatism.

{48} Robertson saved the core of the Agency.
He trusted NSA’s “cryppies” and asked they be
given what was needed for an all-out attack on the

Soviet_ciphers, especially the important Soviet
systems. *

(Ts As Canine had planned, the report fit his
policies, some of which were already being turned
into hardware.

 

(U) Rushing “Bits,” Not Even “Bytes,” into
the Agency

~{48#/8B While Raytheon had been battling
with the Nomad data processor, NSA’s engineers
were designing aseries of much less ambitious
but very important machines for the Agency’s
escalating data problem. They had to automate
data collection. If the Agency was to provide intel-
ligence based on low-level data, it had to modern-
ize its collection systems.

PLL. 86-36
Page 285
FOP SEGRETHOOMINTHREL-UGA,AUS-CAN-OBRANE-NZLIME P L. 86-36

(F87/78D After outlining their ideas, the engi-
neers turned to several contractors. By the end of
the 1950s, NSA’s “basement” had almost two
dozen special-purpose computers to convert
complex analog signals to digital form, to refor-
mat digital data for computer processing, to edit
incoming messages, and even toscan the mes-
sages for “keywords.”The new keyword programs
eliminated messages oflittle interest, saving
thousands of hours of analyst time.

(F848) Audico, Buddy, Swallow, Neely,
Tampa, Colt, Daytona and many other innovative
special computers speeded the processing of all
types of incoming data. Of special importance
were the Orlando and Bogart computers.

(ES//8BD The cost ofthe half dozen very spe-

cialized Orlandos was more than $2,500,000, but -

the role they played in converting Soviet(___]}

‘Remington-Rand

EO 3.3(h)(2)

Ifiessages was invaluable. And their builder,
the SIS’s good friend Technitrol, of Philadelphia,
made them to last. They ran constantly for eight
years.° The Bogarts from ERA (Remington-Rand)
served as long.

8) Although the Bogarts were planned as
straightforward machines to prepare data for
Nomad, asit became evident that Raytheon’s
project was failing, their design shifted. The final
Bogarts came close to being universal comput-
ers.” They were asked to fill in while the Agency
searched for a true data machine.

®) Ittook ERA more than three years to
complete the first Bogart model in 1957. By the
time the other four Bogarts were delivered,
had received almost
$2,500,000 from the Agency, much more than
originally intended. The money was well spent,

 

GAHAPSIS) Bogart

 

 

 

Page 286

 

 

—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREE-USA, AUS, CAN-GBR AND NECA
“TOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL US, AUS-CAN-GBROANE-NZEI-

however. Despite some “bugs” that delayed com-
pletion ofthe first model, the Bogarts were
rugged and ubiquitous, partly because they used
a valuable innovation. Their technology centered
on what many thought would become the best
alternative to vacuum tubes for the “logic” ofa
computer: magnetic cores similar to those
appearing in the memories of advanced machines
of the mid-1950s.°®

(S)-That version of “solid-state” technology
made the Bogarts very dependable. In addition, it
allowed a powerful architecture, which led the
Bogarts to play many different roles within the
Agency. They even became astopgap replace-
ment for Nomad.

<8) After it was accepted that Nomad was a
failure, a Bogart was connected toa battery of
tape drives. Using the IBM tape system that was
evolving into the Agency’s standard, that Bogart
served as a useful cryptanalytic and data process-
ing machine.

(IS+46P That and the other Bogarts became
Agency favorites. They were called on for editing
and scanning for keywords and even for testing
for plain text through calculating the percentage
of spaces ina message. They helped those who
began designing circuits with computer pro-
grams; and the Bogarts were used for advanced
statistical cryptanalysis.? The analysts who were
researching the higher level Soviet systems asked
for most of the Bogart capacity, bul
erated messages received their share of machine
time.”° o

€FS}/8H The Bogarts did much more. With
innovative additions, such as Meccano and Tune-
Seek, which sampled analog (audio) inputs and
converted them’ to various digital forms, the
Bogarts becamie essential tothe Agency’s more
advanced data collection systems.

($3 One of the Bogarts became critical to an
attempt to meet the demands of those frustrated

P_L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

—-FOP-GEGRETGOMIFFIREL-U62-AUS.-GAN-CBR-AND-NZLHG—

by centralized computer systems. Cryptanalysts
wanted computers closer to their work and to
have control over their “runs.” To answer that
need, a Bogart served as the central computer for
aremote job entry system atthe Agency, Rob
Roy. Rob Roy gave a hint of the future of comput-
ers within the Agency because it was a precursor
of “distributed” processing.”

(U) Canine Guards the Fort

CES4/6H The Bogarts were an unqualified
success, but they were not the kind of large-scale
techno-victory that could prove NSA was worthy
enough to guide its own future. When the Bogarts
were still a sketch, Ralph Canine had to deal with
another round of investigations and lobbying
by outsiders. They were aimed atreducing the
powers of NSA and exerting control over its oper-
ations. There was areal threat that if NSA
did not show some astounding progress against
the Communist targets, outsiders, such as
DoD bureaucrats, would begiven power over
American cryptanalysis. Many critics wanted
cryptanalysis turned over to academics.

¢S) Since the 1940s, when requests for a large
number of supergrade personnel NSA needed to
build a “science” cadre were refused, there were
suggestions that a high-level and independent
cryptanalytic think tank be established, one that
could skirt the budget restrictions placed on the
Agency. The “tank’s” experts would deal with dif-
ficult problems without being distracted by day-
to-day operational crises. Being outside of gov-
ernment had other advantages, it was claimed. In
a sometimes-condescending way, it was asserted
that an independent institution would be attrac-
tive tothe “best” men because it could offer
amenities barred to a federal agency. There would
be competitive salaries and a“campus” atmos-
phere and routine; time cards and regulated
hours would not be required.”

€FS77/8t) As NSA’s Scientific Advisory Board’s
membership became more academic, the sugges-

Page 287
—FOP-GEGRETHCCMINTHREL-UGA-AUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZEE—

tions toestablish such acenter increased, and
they were accompanied by recommendations for
an NSA program to support basic science/tech-
nology research.** Board members such as John
von Neumann wanted the Agency to sponsor the
development of an electronic circuit for comput-
ers that would be 1,000 times faster than current
ones. Even nonacademics, such as Howard

Engstrom, attimes joined the chorus of voices
that thought the best way to integrate science and
cryptanalysis was toestablish an independent

“campus” research organization. “

(FS Few within the Agency liked such ideas,
however. They were taken as insults. * And they
appeared to threaten the security of the Agency.

€&S) Ralph Canine led those who wanted to
protect NSA from being torn apart. To do so, he
had to fight many battles simultaneously. The
military SIGINT groups wanted their freedom;
the DoD desired to force “science” and scientific
management on the Agency; “impractical” scien-
tists demanded totake control of research;
Congress wanted research and development to be

Wt

a
Pe

(U) Ralph Canine

Page 288

 

contracted out tothe corporations; and the CIA
sought to establish its own cryptanalytic organi-
zations. ©

CF84/SH Canine was good at his job, but he
could not overcome all the threats and challenges.
He would have to give some ground to maintain
the Agency’s integrity.

(F8/45B Hedid his best to build a viable
research and development branch within the
Agency. He finally secured a few supergrade slots
and lobbied for anexpanded engineering
research group, one with enough men to build
their own special computers and to adequately
supervise contractors.” Hetried tohire more
mathematicians, in hopes that he could stave off
the demands for that independent think tank. He
sought aresearch director who could play the
same political role. And he used all his political
skills to delay being forced to create anew high
administrative position, one for a “civilian”
deputy director. Heknew that would lead to
DoD’s interference within the Agency. The DoD
wanted the power to appoint the deputy, and it
was clear that he would be an “outsider.”

(FS445B Bythe midyear ofhis tenure as
NSA’s director, Canine had done a great deal to
protect the Agency and further its achievements.
But he had not made up for the failure to pene-
trate the new Soviet systems; he had not been
able togain the resources needed to free the
Agency from its dependence on contractors; and
he had not solved the “science” problem. The
Agency remained in trouble. Budgets were being
questioned.

€F8//S1) Fortunately, Canine got some unan-
ticipated help: the Hoover Commission of 1954.
Asa part ofthe mandate President Eisenhower
had given toex-president Herbert Hoover to
review all of the executive branch, a subcommit-
tee led by Mark Clark looked at, ifnot inside,

 
 

TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-USA-AHS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX1

NSA. To Canine’s relief, its many recommenda-
tions were almost all in favor of NSA.%8

+68) When Clark’s recommendations were
echoed by those of a special Executive Office sci-
ence board under James R. Killian (which had
many contacts with NSA’s Science Advisory
group), Canine knew that if he had attractive pro-
grams the president would underwrite a massive
“techno-fix” within the agency.”

€S) The only danger that Canine saw in the
Clark-Killian recommendations was the reap-
pearance of the idea that a captive but independ-
ent corporation beestablished to handle high-
level cryptanalytic research.*° But that threat was
outweighed bythe faith in NSA shown bythe
boards. In 1955 the news spread throughout the
Agency that ideas that had been considered pipe
dreams might be turned into projects.

CES) Several computer-related initiatives that
had been discussed within the Agency and SAB
were brought to Canine. By 1956 they were being
formed into two historic projects that, it was
hoped, would have a major impact onthe com-
puter industry's treatment ofthe Agency and
reverse NSA’s cryptanalytic fortunes.

(48++6D One project was an attempt to define
and build the perfect cryptanalytic computer. The
other was a strange mixture of almost blind faith
in practical cryptanalysis and in high science and
technology.

(4654/5) Neither project went as expected,
however. Although the Eisenhower administra-
tion granted NSA unprecedented amounts for the
Harvest and Freehand Projects in 1962, a genera-
tion after Hooper had called for the integration of
science and high technology into SIGINT, NSA
remained unable tore-create an Ultra. It
remained somewhat ofa second-class citizen in
the eyes of the computer industry.

OP SECRETHCOMINTIRED- USA, AUS, CAN GER AND NZLHAT-

(U) Enter Tom Watson and IBM

(U) Before the two great projects were more
than speculations, it appeared that the Agency
could rely upon the computer companies for
much of what it needed, especially for data pro-
cessing computers. Two major firms had emerged
that were stable and willing to finance technolog-
ical developments ontheir own. Remington-
Rand (which included the old ERA) and IBM
were upgrading their lines of computers and
planning new advances. IBM, concentrating on
data processing equipment, was finally catching
up to Remington’s sales.

$ Because ofits long history of interaction
with the SIGINT agencies, including the ongoing
Sled and other RAM work, and with so many of
its computer engineers having been part of the
cryptanalytic efforts of World War I, IBM had a
special view of NSA. It saw the Agency as in need
ofits help. IBM also saw NSA as an agency that
could help IBM.

(U) IBM needed help. For IBM’s computer
advocates, who found it difficult to convince Tom
Watson that electronics would become asound
business venture, contracts with government
agencies were vital. They would provide needed
research funds. Two old government friends of
IBM’s tabulators, NSA and AEC, seemed likely
candidates to subsidize development.

(U) IBM engineers needed good friends. Tom
Watson had taken await-and-see attitude
towards electronic computers. After a rather cost-
ly and somewhat embarrassing venture, the cre-
ation ofthe SSEC computer, he resisted major
computer investments. He financed several small
research projects and supported the development
and production of electronic add-ons for the tabs.
But even emerging competition did not change
his attitude. He was aware of the UNIVAC and of
the work at ERA, but itwas not until the
increased pressures from his own engineers and
the outbreak of the Korean War that he gave per-

Page 289
 

mission to build a full-fledged electronic comput-
er.” That permission came with some important
qualifications, however.

(U) The firm’s computer enthusiasts had to
guarantee that IBM would not lose appreciable
amounts on any computer development. Watson
let itbe known that enough customers had to
have made promises to purchase any proposed
computer before it went tothe manufacturing
stage. Someone besides IBM, he hoped, would
underwrite development and initial production
costs.

(U) An IBM research group associated with
Columbia University was the first to take up the
challenge. In late 1950 IBM agreed to a cost-plus,
$1.00 fixed-fee arrangement for a one-of-a-kind
special computer for Naval Ordnance. The NORC
project launched IBM into computer develop-
ment, but it did not satisfy many of the engineers
who had been lobbying for a commercial product.

(U) Among them were many old friends of
NSA. The head of IBM’s electronics laboratory,
Ralph Palmer (ex-OP-20-G), was constantly
badgering the IBM hierarchy for more
resources. ** Having spent several years attempt-
ing todevelop his Tape Processing Computer
(TPM) and then becoming the overseer of the cor-
poration’s Poughkeepsie laboratory, he thought
1950 was a make-or-break year for the corpora-
tion’s entry into the commercial computer mar-
ket.

(U) His insistence, combined with Tom
Watson’s desire toshow acontribution tothe
Korean War effort, led to high-level IBM man-
agers being allowed to make the rounds of gov-
ernment and military agencies asking what type
of machine was desired and what the agencies
might be willing to pay. Ofcourse, they visited
NSA (AFSA atthe time), where they learned of
the need for adata processor. They also learned
that NSA expected Atlas and Abner tobe com-
pleted soon and that the Agency looked forward

Page 290

to buying more machines from ERA and
Technitrol.

(U) The news about those purchases was wor-
risome, but it gave the IBM engineers some need-
ed ammunition. When they returned home, they
had good arguments for launching into a second
IBM computer program. They pointed out that
many government agencies had indicated they
would buy acomputer from the company. Of
course, they emphasized the competitive angle. If
IBM did not offer amachine quickly, it faced
countless repetitions of what was happening at
NSA.

€ Computers were displacing tabs, and new
companies were displacing IBM. NSA, the engi-
neers reported, would soon have six of the largest
and most advanced computers in the world, and
none of them would be IBM’s. They underscored
another point: they could design a computer that
would fit the needs of many types of users besides
those already contacted. IBM could have a widely
marketable machine. Thirty ormore ofthem
could be sold as soon as they were produced and
additional orders were sure to arrive.

(U) After a push by young Tom Watson Jr.
and areassurance that patents would remain
with the company, the engineers got a go-ahead
from Tom senior to begin the Defense Calculator
project. The engineers quickly decided onthe
nature ofthe computer that was later named the
IBM 701.

(U) Their decision was one that showed that
financial imperative, especially the need to devel-
op a marketable, universal computer, had to out-
weigh sensitivity toNSA’s special computing
needs.

(U) After examining the requirements of the
potential customers and balancing them against
IBM’s need to get an electronic machine on the
market, it became clear that NSA would have to
be treated asa stepsister. The new 701 computer

“TOP SECRETICOMINTNREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZUIAT—
“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL -USA-AUG-CAN-GBR-ANDNZLUXT

was to be avon Neumann-like number cruncher,
a machine to satisfy missile developers, meteorol-
ogists, and ordnance agencies. The design made
sense because the mathematically oriented agen-
cies were the vast majority of expected customers.
IBM decided to make some modifications to the
design of the well-known TAS machine, however.
They included magnetic tapes and enhanced I/O
processing, but internal calculations remained
the machine’s forte. The 701 relied upon CRT-like
fast memory and aslower magnetic drum.**

(U) IBM turned away from a design that was
suited to NSA. The option to use the machine that
Ralph Palmer had been working on, the TPM,
was dropped because it was an “accounting” com-
puter. Palmer, favoring a design that would allow
asmooth transition from tabulator processing,
focused on developing amachine that handled
much input and output, but relatively little inter-
nal processing. Significantly, it was based on vari-
able length internal “words,” a feature essential to
day-to-day cryptanalytic methods. It also used a
Binary-Coded Decimal (BCD) representation of
numbers which reduced the effort needed to
translate characters.** All in all, his TPM was bet-
ter for codebreaking work than the 701.75

(U) Unfortunately for NSA, there were prob-
lems with some of the TPM’s essential elements,
such as its tape drives. Asa result, the TPM was
kept in the laboratory as the 701 was rushed into
production.

(U) With the 7o01’s design specifications in
hand, the IBM representatives returned to the
government agencies seeking contracts.
Unfortunately, they had to carry with them the
news that the rental for the 701 might be twice as
what had been mentioned during the earlier vis-
its. The price increase was one of the reasons why
NSA’s computer group hesitated when IBM
returned to Washington in mid-1952. The 701
was almost rejected, but itwas given asecond
chance after astudy group was formed. Joe

“FOP SECRETHICOMINTHREL USA AUS CAN OBRAND NELHET

Eachus led the evaluation, and William Friedman
composed the summary reports.

€#S) IBM had some admirers who recom-
mended that the Agency acquire two 701s. But the
review panel’s report, though positive, was cau-
tious. The number-crunching nature of the
machine was noted; there were complaints about
the 701 being almost twice as expensive as an
Atlas; and there were worries that IBM could not
keep to its promised delivery schedule. The deliv-
ery issue was serious. Some at the Agency wanted
avery severe financial penalty clause put in the
contract; others demanded cancellation ofthe
contract ifthe first machine was not in
Washington by early spring 1953.

(FS) The group reached a consensus and rec-
ommended that two 701s with extra tape drives
and memory be ordered. If the first was not deliv-
ered ontime, both would be cancelled. It was
expected that the two machines would cost the
Agency $36,000 amonth inrent. ” The first
machine arrived close to its promised date, but it
was more expensive than thought. With operat-
ing charges included, it cost the agency $531,000
a year. *” Disappointing to IBM’s friends within
the Agency, the 701 did not run as well as expect-
ed.

(©) Despite the 701’s tantrums, it was put to
productive use. The Agency reprogrammed many
Atlas and Abner jobs for the 701 and even made it
areplacement for Copperhead. But there were
constant problems with the tapes and their
drives; much time was wasted because cards had
tobe used asthe 701’s input. The 701 was
replaced as soon as IBM completed its more reli-
able 704 in 1956.

(33 IBM’s computer reputation within the
Agency was saved bythe arrival of the commer-
cial version of Palmer’s TPM, now called the 702.
It arrived in early 1955, just after Nomad was can-
celed. In many ways, the 702 “saved the day.” As
would the Bogarts, it filled in part of the gap left

Page 294
TOP SECRETICONTNTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZDIXT—

bythe demise of Nomad. The 702 was a better
high-volume data machine than the 701.

(S) Excited bythe 702’s data processing
potential, the production group atthe Agency
began writing programs toreplace the punch-
card procedures for large volume jobs. The 702
did not include the hoped-for ability to perform
I/O and other tasks concurrently, but its vastly
improved tapes immediately showed their stuff.

(S) When the 702’s 1956 upgrade, the 705,
was announced, IBM’s fortunes atthe Agency
were secure. Five 705s were ordered. The 705s
became standbys in the Agency and benchmarks
for its production processing.

(83 IBM’s role inthe life ofthe Agency
increased. By 1957 IBM had manufactured about
half of NSA’s general-purpose computers. By
1961 the company had a lock on general-purpose
computing. Ifthe Bogarts, which were originally
envisioned as special-purpose machines, and the
experimental Alwac and LPG small computers
are excluded, the only non-IBM general-purpose
machine in the Agency in the early 1960s was an
old Atlas [1. And IBM remained as the vendor for
the Agency’s electromechanical machines. *

(U) A Machine for Us, Perhaps

(87 Although IBM began to offer machines
such asthe 702 and 705 todo much of what
Nomad had been intended for, NSA’s cryptana-
lysts and engineers were not satisfied. All the IBM
machines were designed for others; NSA
remained apoor relation interms of computer
architecture. The cryptanalysts and even the
plaintext/TA handlers sought atruly “perfect”
NSA machine, one that went beyond Sled in its
originality and powers. It was difficult to achieve.

€ES) There were differences between the
mathematically oriented, the operational crypt-
analysts, and the data processors over the defini-
tion ofan “NSA computer.” In addition, the

Page 202

extraordinary cost ofa large custom-made
machine kept itas anideal rather than a plan
throughout the first half of the 1950s.

(sy Only when the demand to conquer the
Soviet problem and General Canine’s political
skills came together in 1956 was there an oppor-
tunity to create the great NSA computer. There
were hints that enough money would be made
available to allow the Agency to free itself from an
architecture that was determined by the comput-
er market place rather than by crypto-needs.
There also seemed enough to make upfor the
Nomad tragedy. Inresponse, old desires and
ideas re-emerged.

8) Concepts ofa machine quite different
from the commercial offerings, one far beyond a
universal comparator ora Sled, had been dis-
cussed within the Agency (or its predecessors)
since the late 1940s.

(8 Dissatisfaction with the von Neumann
fundamentals had always been evident, especial-
ly among those involved with “production” rather
than research. The type of programming an Atlas
required seemed wasteful and illogical to those
who had become used to calling upon separate
special-function machines through commands
plugged into high-speed boards. Supported by
mandates to avoid building single-purpose com-
puters, those who had grown up within the
Agency, especially within the SIS, had led the cru-
sades for the late 1940s alternatives: Sled and
Abner’s special hardwired features. Those were
seen, however, as only a first step towards a true
cryptoarchitecture. *?

€ES445B Soon after the Abner and Sled proj-
ects were under way, explorations of great exten-
sions of their special architecture began. One cen-
tral NSA machine seemed to be the goal. By 1954,
the explorations became formalized under the
project name “Farmer.” The technical/conceptual
leader of Farmer was Ray Bowman, the old SIS
hand who had been so important to Abner’s spe-

FOP-GEGREFIGOMINFHREL-HGA-AUS-CAN- CBR AND NZEINT-
—FOP-GEGRETHCOMINTHREL-USA:AUS,-CAN-GBR ANE NZEHK I

cial crypto-features. Inthe mid-1950s, he was
leading the Agency’s analytic machine design
group.®° He received much help on Farmer from
Samuel S. Snyder.

(484/8D In 1954 Bowman distributed a mem-
orandum that was especially pleasing to the cryp-
toproduction groups. Init he outlined his archi-
tectural and procedural ideas. That first sketch
gained wide circulation within the Agency. It
was followed by a series of papers that expanded
the Farmer ideas.**

(Z$44S}) Bowman’s Farmer was to be a large,
all-purpose cryptanalytic machine. Atits center
was to be a general-purpose computer that would
act as a traffic director, taking the place of the old
plugboards found on the tab-relay combinations
and on Connie and Sled. That central computer
was to be the “cop” that brought order to the elec-
trical pathway (bus) that connected any number
of special-purpose computers, each of which was
to perform a particular crypto-function.
Important tothe goal of efficiency, the central
computer would be smart enough to allow more
than one job to be processed at a time.

(ZS Bowman was not asking for technology,
but for more ideas. Knowing of the Agency’s new
long-term Dervish initiative todevelop _high-
speed components, he thought it best that Farmer
bea five-year design project. A follow-on effort
starting in 1961 might lead to some construction.
Bowman also thought it best that Farmer remain
an Agency project, with all the design work to be
done in-house. Only after the architecture had
been refined, and when ten to twenty megacycle
components were available, should outsiders be
brought in.*#

(48455) Bowman’s ideas and recommenda-
tions were widely circulated. Many engineers and
cryptanalysts joined his study group. The group
surveyed needs and methods within the Agency,
leading to new suggestions. It worked so diligent-
ly that it was able to issue a report quite soon.

—TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL USA, AUS-CAN-GBRANE NZL

(484461) The report contained a surprise.
Another item had been added to Farmer's wish
list. Itchanged the nature and, toa significant
degree, Farmer’s purpose. Now the Farmer proj-
ect was to include asolution tothe data process-
ing problem. Itwas totake up where Nomad
failed as well as be a super-Sled! #4

(U) One Big Machine Beats Out Many Little
Ones

(FS//8t) Fortunately for Bowman and his
overburdened aides, the report stated that this
new version of Farmer was not to be turned into
hardware until the technology to support it was
developed. **

(ES) However, in1955 there was growing
pressure to turn ideas into machines immediate-
ly. That made it difficult for Bowman’s group to
keep Farmer awell-ordered design project.
Criticism ofthe pace ofthe project arose. There
were rumblings that Bowman and Snyder were
taking ontoo much and that ifa unique Agency
machine were ever to appear, aspecial outside
group would be needed.

-(S}There were more fundamental criticisms.
Joseph Eachus did not like Farmer’s architectur-
al premises. He favored a type of machine that fit
his view of the role of research and mathematics
in cryptanalysis. He wanted computing brought
close to and put under the control of users. That
“distributed” processing contrasted with a large
and centralized computing facility controlled by
experts that “data processors” favored.

-€6}-Fhe distributed processing advocates were
able to begin a project in1954. Asa result, two
years later, the agency received the custom-
designed Rogue system from Logistics Research
of California. It had three “outstations” attached
to its small Alwac general-purpose computer. A
job could be submitted from any of the stations,
saving users much time. Rogue proved so attrac-
tive that a much more powerful system, Rob Roy,

Page 293
 

et oo 8 eee

iis &

RE
ee

 

 

(U) Rob Roy

was ordered. Built around a Bogart, it had five
outstations, and was in operation by early 1960.°°

(4S There were much, much more ambitious
plans for distributed processing. In 1955 General
Canine was convinced that what the Agency
needed to meet the Soviet challenge was super-
high-power mathematical machines close by each
cryptanalytic group. To achieve that, he made a
startling decision.

€¥8) An order was cut to develop and manu-
facture anew’ version ofthe ERA 1103.
Transistors were to replace tubes, thus allowing
machines small enough to be put close to, even on
the desks of, codebreakers. Canine looked for-
ward to having forty of the new ERA devices with-
ina short time. ERA’s new parent, Remington-
Rand, perhaps thought the old navy-ERA rela-
tionship was about tobe reborn. Forty 1103s
would cost at least $20,000,000. *”

Page 294

(8) But Remington did not get $20,000,000.
The contract for the new 1103 did not go to ERA,
nor did itlead tothe forty machines. After six
months of searching and negotiations, the Philco
Corporation, which already had a reputation for
manufacturing high-speed transistors, became
the parent ofthe Solo project. Remington-
Rand/ERA eventually gained asmall part of the
project; it was called on to manufacture the core
memory for Solo.3*

8) Despite Philco’s advanced technology,
Solo’s development bogged down. Cost and
schedule overruns led to finger pointing among
the contractors and astartling price tag of
$1,000,000 for the first desk-size copy of Solo.*?
And it did not appear atthe Agency until spring
1959. Not surprisingly, only one Solo was manu-
factured.

48) There were other disappointments for
those who favored distributed general-purpose
computing. Computer technology ofthe 1950s
did not favor small machines and remote com-
puting ofany type. Adesk-size LPG-30 the
Agency purchased in 1957, for example, did not
perform well and had to be replaced.

(G} Meanwhile, Bowman’s Farmer progress
reports continued to circulate within the Agency.
They received so much support that the criticisms
by “mathematical” types such as Joe Eachus were
ignored. One important reason for their dismissal
was that Bowman’s computer concepts received
the blessing of a special NSA Scientific Advisory
Board committee. It was charged with outlining a
general-purpose flexible analytic machine pro-
gram.

(&} After ayear’s study, inearly 1955 the
panel’s chairman, John C. McPherson of IBM,
issued a report containing the design for “the per-
fect cryptanalytic machine.” *°

€ McPherson’s logical-technical recommen-
dations were much like those Ray Bowman had

—FOP-GEGRETIGOMINFHREL-UGAAUE,GAN-GBR-AND-NZEHA—
TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-USH-AUS;-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLHE—

suggested. That was because McPherson’s panel
was helped by one of his IBM colleagues, S. W.
Dunwell. Dunwell, who had done so much for the
SIS during World War Il and who had become
central toall ofIBM’s product planning, had
spent the previous two years ona special IBM
assignment. Stationed in Washington, D.C., he
visited the major federal agencies seeking knowl-
edge oftheir future computer needs. Among his
visits were many to NSA where he “brushed up on
the requirements being postulated by [its] staff
members.” #

CES) Although McPherson’s “perfect cryptan-
alytic” machine panel agreed with the architec-
tural ideas in the Farmer proposals, its procedur-
alideas were very different. The NSA Scientific
Advisory Board’s panel recommended that the
Agency stop dragging its feet and turn ideas into
hardware. McPherson offered IBM’s help.** It
was not long before that “help” arrived; it came
within a few weeks.

(U) An ERA by Any Other Name Is IBM

(U) Stephen Dunwell had been sent to
Washington ona mission. He and other electron-
ics advocates within IBM, such as Ralph Palmer,
were again trying to sidestep corporate opposi-
tion to computers. Despite the success of the 700
series, management resisted investing in research
or large-scale development projects. To men like
Dunwell, IBM seemed doomed totake second
place behind Remington-Rand. The corporation
had increased its research expenditures and had a
program for technology development, but it did
not seem enough. Dunwell realized that the only
hope to keep IBM at the competitive edge was, as
inthe early 1950s, to win government contracts
for advanced computers.*4 Those contracts
invariably included research subsidies.

(U) The need to win contracts to support IBM
research grew intense inMay 1955 when
Remington-Rand triumphed over IBM and won
the critical LARC competition for an AEC super-

—FOP-SECREHIGOMNTHREL-USA-AUS,-CAN. GER AND NZI UX7

computer. The LARC project would allow
Remington to develop transistors and to move far
beyond its UNIVAC and 1103 computers. ** LARC
also gave Remington’s Philadelphia group under
Presper Eckert the chance to redefine main-
stream computer architecture.

(U) LARC was tobe super-fast because of
its multiple processors. One processor would con-
trol inputs and outputs; another would direct
arithmetic operations. Extremely important,
LARC was tobe able toperform more than
one task ata time. And itwas to incorporate
many new technology-based advances. It was
to have, for example, ultra-fast memory fetches
(0.5 microseconds).

(U) Once the LARC contract was announced,
IBM searched for its own supercomputer con-
tract. Its lead engineers were determined that
their coveted development program ofthe mid-
1950s would not die. To save it, a machine had to
be constructed to prove that its ideas and tech-
nologies were viable. But IBM management did
not want to risk a huge investment on a “demon-
stration” computer.

(U) Asa_ result, anIBM representative
appeared at NSA’s headquarters just weeks after
Remington won the LARC contract. He came
with a very attractive offer.** IBM, he said, would
build asuper-speed machine tailored tothe
Agency's needs and have it in place by early 1959!

(U) As details of the offer for the special NSA
machine were revealed, itseemed as if IBM had
something the Agency could not refuse. For
$2,500,000 NSA could have a computer with cir-
cuits two and one-half times faster than the cur-
rent standard; for $3,500,000 it could have one
with more advanced transistors and circuits, ones
that would run at ten megacycles, or ten times the
speed of the best components of 1955. Either ver-
sion ofthe machine would have a revolutionary
core memory that could bring information to the
processors within 0.5 microseconds.

Page 295
TOP SECRETICONINFHREL-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-Het

(U) There was more to the offer: IBM had, its
representative said, a super-fast and high-capaci-
ty tape system. That system would be sold to the
Agency, as would the computer, ata bargain
basement price. The reason: IBM wanted a
sophisticated user to test out its new components
and architectural schemes.

8) For the Agency’s R/D group, the IBM offer
seemed a gift from heaven. In mid-1955, Farmer’s
designers were terribly depressed. They were
under pressures to produce, but the Agency was
unable to allocate the people needed to continue
the Farmer developments. Bowman and Snyder
were among the most frustrated. They knew that
the Agency needed a significant leap in comput-
ing technology to meet the Soviet crisis. But they
could do little to answer the cries for help from
cryptanalytic legends like Solomon Kullback.*’
The frustration level was so high that the R/D
team seriously considered quitting the Agency to
form a private company, one that could explore
the new crypto-machine ideas. **

(48) The IBM offer came at exactly the right
moment for them. IBM, they thought, could take
over the Farmer project.

(WU) Is Half a Farmer Better Than...?

€48) A follow-up visit by another IBM delega-
tion, which included engineers who had been at
SIS during the war, linked the Farmer goals more
closely to IBM’s offer.4? That tipped the balance
atthe Agency. Notime was lost. An inspection
trip was made to the IBM plant by an NSA team
in mid-July.Within afew days aletter contract
was drawn upfor the super-fast version of the
IBM/NSA computer, one which, ata minimum,
could serve as the central switching station for a
Farmer machine.*° IBM was beginning to call
that computer “Stretch.” NSA liked the name
“Harvest” for its machine.

(FH Then, the hope of rescuing Farmer
encountered “outsiders.” To please the DoD and

Page 296

the politicians, Canine had brought in an outside
scientist to head a new research office. It had final
say on large research and development projects.
It reviewed the IBM proposal and to the shock of
men like Sam Snyder, rejected it. The proposed
arrangement with IBM was declared improper. A
government agency was not to support develop-
ment work within acorporation! Why should
NSA pay for the development, for example, of
special high-speed transistors that would become
part of IBM’s inventory?*

(#8) Just then, another block to implement-
ing Farmer appeared. Joseph Eachus, frustrated
over salaries, decided toleave the Agency and
help the new Honeywell-Raytheon combination
turn their Datamatic computer into a market con-
tender. Snyder feared that even ifthe NSA
research office relented, Datamatic would
demand to bid on the “IBM” work, thus delaying
any progress for so long that IBM might abandon
its generous offer.**

6/446H Neither IBM nor NSA’s R/D group
could accept an end to the IBM-Farmer alliance.
They were supported bySolomon  Kullback.**
While he was lobbying the research office, anoth-
er prestigious IBM group rushed to the Agency in
the summer of 1955 to argue for their “Stretch”
proposal. Dunwell and the famous designer Gene
Amdahl explained how pipelining, an interrupt
system, “look-ahead,” multiprocessing, inter-
leaved memories, and automatic indexing would
make the new NSA machine far ahead of its time.
Amultiprogramming ability, torun more than
one program at a time, was more than hinted at.

($4455 The special IBM transistor and mem-
ory projects were described again, and their role
in making the IBM machine perhaps one hun-
dred times more powerful than existing comput-
ers, was explained.

(8) Sam Snyder’s group presented new argu-
ments to NSA’s research office, explaining that
NSA had frequently subsidized work within pri-

—TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-USAAUS, GAN-GBR-ANB-HZEE
“TOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZX

vate companies when it was to the benefit of the
government.*® Solomon Kullback was joined by
Agency legends such as Abe Sinkov and Dale
Marston in emphasizing how much the Agency
needed a technological revolution.

(© The pressure worked but not all the way.
It was decided the Agency would support only a
part of IBM’s “Stretch” project. NSA agreed to
give IBM $800,000 for eighteen months work on
its high-speed core memory explorations. As
something like insurance for the future of the spe-
cial NSA computer, another $800,000 was
promised to support an IBM team which was to
design a computer that truly fit Agency needs, one
following the ideas in the Farmer proposals.

(U) St. Paul in Mohansic

(C) Somehow the flexibility in contractual
relationships that had caused such furor when
ERA was the favored company was becoming
acceptable again. Apparently the late 1955 con-
tracts for the Silo (memory) and Plantation (com-
puter) projects were not put out to bid, and IBM
was allowed to retain patent rights to much of
what was to be developed.

(FS4/SB In fact, the Agency was creating a
new version of an ERA, one within IBM’s walls.
While IBM’s engineers began what became a very
frustrating attempt tokeep the promises about
the high-speed memory and transistors, a special
and highly secure Plantation area was set up
within IBM’s Mohansic laboratory. It was to be
the new home of Farmer as well asa company-
run NSA laboratory.

GESHSB The process of gaining high-level
clearances for the Mohansic crew was begun. At
the same time, Sam Snyder made the rounds of
NSA’s cryptanalytic and production groups
requesting reports explaining their secret meth-
ods and procedures. The reports were shipped to

—“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHRER USA, AUS -CAN-GBROANE NZ —

Mohansic. IBM’s laboratory soon had a library
filled with NSA’s most precious secrets.”

(ES4SH The Plantation area became the
Agency’s computer think tank, but this time its
powerful figures were not the academic types who
had left “G” to found ERA.®* Nor were they the
new applied scientists who were making such a
mark at centers such as Rand or Lincoin Labs.

GSH6) Those with practical orientations
and those who had gained their cryptologic
experience inthe SIS were very influential.
Stephen Dunwell, who had once led the SIS’s
machine room, directed IBM’s Stretch project
and had much todo with defining what the
special NSA computer would belike. William
Lawless, who had also been incharge of
the Agency machine production facilities, played
amore direct role within the “lab.” Two other ex-
Agency experts were hired to help sort through
the crypto-procedures toidentify common
and essential cryptanalytic functions. Samuel
Schmitt, acryptanalyst/statistician, and the
mathematician George Cramer, who had worked
for ERA for some years, became invaluable. They
gave much advice to the lead IBM engineers, Paul
S. Herwitz, James Pomerene, and Fred Brooks.®?

(U) But IBM’s computer designers could not
just attend to NSA’s advice. The Stretch design-
ers, itturned out, had to please other agencies
and bow to the marketplace.

(U) Bucks Talk: the Favored Sister Gets the
Attention

(U) Just as the Plantation group began to con-
sider how to turn the Farmer ideas into hardware,
IBM received some good news - at least it was
good for the corporation. Determined to displace
Remington-Rand, IBM had formalized its
advanced work inlate 1955, given itthe name
“Stretch,” and scoured the country for more gov-
ernment contracts. What IBM had to offer was
daring. They promised tomake advances in

Page 297
“TOP "SECRETICONINTIREL- USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-Nzti—

underlying technology and in architecture at the
same time, something that would allow the com-
pany to leap frog Remington-Rand’s LARC.

(U) For those with supercomputer needs, like
physicists inthe AEC, the Stretch program was
enticing. They convinced the agency to pay IBM
$4,300,000 for a super-calculating computer for
Los Alamos. Soon, IBM had hopes that several
other orders would follow for asimilar
machine. °°

(U) The AEC Stretch became the focus of
attention at IBM, and it was not long before a
machine designed for physicists’ number-crunch-
ing had an impact on what NSA’s machine could
be. Perhaps as early as 1956 and certainly by the
time IBM and NSA were negotiating the contract
for the construction ofa machine inlate 1957,
IBM had decided that it would be too expensive to
create aunique cryptanalytic computer. If NSA
wanted acomputer, acentral part ofit would
have tobe aclone ofthe Los Alamos design,
including its high-speed and expensive floating-
point arithmetic processor.

Cis} NSA had become astepsister again
despite its original belief that IBM was to build “a
machine designed primarily for Agency needs.”*
What NSA was calling “Harvest” was not going to
be totally unique.

(U) A Data Factory

(84/SB Non-uniqueness also marked the
NSA-IBM attempt to give Nomad a second life.
NSA had its hopes raised in early 1955 when IBM
representatives described the company’s progress
onits high-speed, high-density tapes®* and an
automated tape machine that would eliminate the
need for human intervention in the selection and
mounting of data. Exploration of such a system
had been conducted as part ofthe corporation’s
AEC projects.

Page 298

£S#455 When the special design group at
Mohansic reaffirmed NSA’s need for amass data
processing capability, the Agency’s engineers
argued that NSA should help IBM develop what
would become known as the Tractor tape system.
In response, the Agency gave IBM $300,000 for
additional research, hoping the corporation’s
engineers would conquer the remaining prob-
lems.°?

€S4/8D If the hopes for Tractor were realized,
the NSA Harvest computer could become the
desired super data processor the Agency needed.
The tape system would allow the creation ofa
centralized database to replace the thousands of
separate magnetic tapes and tens of millions of
IBM cards that were overwhelming the Agency.
As significant, with Tractor, Harvest might well
become agiant complex toreplace all the
Agency's tabulators and many of its special-pur-
pose devices.

CYS456 In fact, many hoped that Harvest
would become NSA’s data factory. Once in place,
it would allow great efficiencies in the use of man-
power and resources and make centralized man-
agement possible. Users would submit jobs and
receive their output on a regular twenty-four hour
basis.°* The Agency was very concerned about
information management, so much so that it held
apathbreaking conference in1959 that helped
define the emerging field of database manage-
ment.®

(454/38 The influence ofthose who saw
NSA’s future in terms of data processing reached
into IBM’s secret development laboratory. Their
data processing demands were merged with
IBM’s decision to mold NSA’s “perfect” computer
to the corporation’s need to minimize the costs of
its Stretch computer program. All that was
reflected inthe Plantation report the Mohansic
group issued in May 1957.
P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

(U) Not a Farmer, a Nomad

. €&) That first Harvest Manual accepted the
AEC Stretch asthe NSA system’s centerpiece, it
gave data processing a prominent place, and it
recommended that implementing many ofthe
architectural ideas of the 1955 Farmer proposals
be deferred if not abandoned.

68). NSA’s “special” computer had become a
sophisticated appendage to a Stretch, rather than
Stretch being a “traffic cop” for a cluster of sepa-
rate special-purpose units linked through a data
bus.”

: (PS) The «special cryptanalytic portion of
_ Harvest, its attachment, or “bump,” was to con-
- centrate ona few general cryptanalytic tasks. It
_ was not to be aimed at particular systems, such as
the new Soviet | or the
Instead, IBM’s team recommended
that the “bump” bea very sophisticated and aug-
mented version ofthe Streaming units in
Abner.™ The Streaming unit mimicked the logic
of the older comparators.

(7 The Harvest “attachment” was to allow
high-speed access to any “bit” or combination of
bits in a stream of data, was to offset two streams,
and was to perform the traditional counts and
threshold tests used in statistical cryptanalysis. It
was to be able to identify and perhaps correct gar-
bles, to perform various types of modular arith-
metic on the two data streams to produce a third
stream, and it was to have a very advanced table
lookup feature to facilitate language weighting.
By a clever use ofa base address and the charac-
ters encountered ina text, digraph or other lan-
guage frequency weights could be referenced and
applied without having to wait while aunique
memory address was created. ®?

(@) Another special memory feature was rec-
ommended tohelp those involved with code-
breaking rather than cipher work. By simplifying
how a bit in memory was “filled” and located, fre-

TOP SECRE TICOMINTIREL-USA-~AUS-GAN-GER-AND-NZLUX 4

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL USA AUS--CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIX4

quency distributions and indicators of the exis-
tence or nonexistence of a group could be tallied
at ultra-fast speeds. To facilitate all types of pro-
cessing, the “attachment” was to have special
ways of indexing — ways toaddress and access
memory.”

¢€} The mid-1957 Mohansic report admitted
that the “attachment” demanded a special type of
program, one that might have to be different from
the one used onthe main Stretch computer. In
addition, the “attachment” would need a complex
electronic version ofthe kind of plugboard pro-
gram that controlled Sled and other special
machines.

(Gj The recommendations included some
architectural possibilities. Multiprocessing/pro-
gramming was one. It was thought it would be
possible to have Stretch performing one or more
tasks while the “attachment” was in operation
and that the attachment itself might, asthe
Farmer outline had recommended, perform sev-
eral jobs concurrently.”

(}Despite the complexity of Harvest and its
deviation from the original Farmer ideas, NSA’s
in-house evaluation group gave general approval
tothe design. But itasked for some additional
information. When IBM submitted a revised plan
later in 1957, itwas accepted. Implicit in the
acceptance was the idea that the Stretch with the
attached NSA “bump” would be able to access a
centralized database. Harvest was to be as much
a Nomad as a Sled.

(© The evaluation group’s approval was
needed because the IBM contract proposal was
quite ambitious. Itwas nolonger one for
$3,500,000, but for more than $10,000,000.”
That raised some questions within the Agency.

() But concerns about Harvest were not lim-
ited to its increased price. And they began to be

Page 299
FOR-SGEGRET/GOMITHREL—UCA-AUS--GAN-GBR-AND-NAEH

voiced before the Plantation report had been for-
mally released in 1957.78

(U) Engineering Is Not Science, at Least to
the SAB

FS} Tothe embarrassment ofits NSA par-
ents, Harvest came under fire from the Agency’s
Science board and, later, from the godfathers of
cryptanalytic automation, Joseph Wenger and
Howard Engstrom. Their criticisms encouraged
others. The Harvest debate became tied to more
fundamental issues within the Agency. Asa
result, in the late 1950s there was a replay of the
standoff between science types and operational
cryptanalysts that had frustrated Hooper and
Wenger inthe 1930s. Harvest became a battle-
ground for larger questions about SIGINT’s
future. Central to the debate was the issue of who
should control NSA. The science boards and the
“old-timers” had many disputes over technologi-
cal and science policies.

€PS) Joseph Wenger had not expected that
when he established an advisory board (SCAG)
for OP-20-G after World War II. In fact, he
thought the board would prevent frictions. He
purposely filled it with men who would be sensi-
tive to day-to-day needs within the Agency. His
appointees had direct experience with crypt-
analysis and its technology.

8} Such appointments continued after
AFSA was created. That proved useful. When the
Department of Defense, which had become
enamored with the new applied scientists, pres-
sured AFSA to give science an important voice in
its work, the old SCAG group was used as a means
of fending off unwanted outside influence.”

<8) When NSA was formed and SCAG was
turned into the Science Advisory Board (SAB), its
membership looked much like before. It played a
crucial role in protecting the Agency during the
first rounds of outside review.” As important, the
first NSA boards refrained from interfering in

Page 300

Agency affairs. Its members saw their role as one
of offering help when asked.”

+S} But asthe Agency failed to conquer the
Soviet problem and as the Department of Defense
increasingly called onscientists, the board
changed. Its membership shifted towards relative
outsiders, it was allowed totake independent
action, and it was asked to perform some rather
onerous tasks. By the mid-1950s, it and its host of
new advisory subcommittees were directed to
review Agency operations and to devise specific
plans for technological advancement.

8) The board was frequently asked to pre-
empt outside interference by conducting reviews
of Agency programs and achievements.”
Although the board continued to serve as a buffer
against hostile outsiders, its new role led to
resentment among the Agency's staff.” Agency
personnel thought many SAB recommendations
were unrealistic and, in some instances, insulting.
Inthe mid-1950s, frictions between the board
and the “insiders” intensified, rather than dimin-
ished, when the Agency was told to bring in new
blood in the form of a civilian deputy director and
anew deputy for research.

8} Following the directives ofthe DoD,
instead of promoting one of the in-house group to
the supergrade research directorship, an outsider
was brought in. It was thought that someone with
arange of scientific contacts, experience in
designing long-term programs, and abundle of
fresh ideas would invigorate the Agency. Asa
result, Solomon Kullback, who had been the
Technical Director of Research and Development
since 1949, was assigned to a second-place slot in
the revamped Agency research office.”

(U) The new research director, Alva B. Clark,
seemed the ideal man from the ideal background.
An electrical engineer/scientist, he had pulled
himself through the ranks of AT&T to become a
vice president at what was regarded as the pre-
mier research facility inthe world, Bell

FOR-SEGRETHICOMINTHREL- USA AUS_CAN CER AND NZDIKT
TOE SECRETUCOMINTURE| USA AUS—CAN- GEE ANE Maat,

Laboratories. Bell Labs was unique because it
conducted applied as well as abstract research, a
blend that DoD’s leaders thought was vital to
meet NSA’s challenges. Clark arrived at the
Agency in early 1954, reviewed many programs,
helped reshape the Scientific Advisory Board, and
suggested new initiatives.

¢€3 Many of his decisions did not fit with the
ways of the Agency, however. One of them was his
rejection of the proposed use of the Farmer proj-
ect monies to support IBM’s Stretch efforts. Alva
Clark did not get tosee the results ofhis deci-
sions: he died just two months after he finally
signed off on the Plantation and Silo projects.”

(6} The Agency employees hoped the next
director would not resist a full Harvest program
and that he would be more willing to follow the
advice ofthe cryptanalytic old hands on other
matters. They lobbied to have an “insider”
appointed.

(U) Howard Engstrom, the man who had
directed OP-20-G’s RAM projects and then
became central to ERA, and who later had served
onthe Scientific Advisory Board throughout the

 

(U) Howard Engstrom

FOP-GEGRETIGOMANFHREL UGA -AUE-GAN-GBR-ANB-NZEH

1950s, was contacted. In late 1956, although his
health was failing, he agreed to leave his position
as vice president of Remington-Rand (recently
absorbed bythe navy’s good friend, the Sperry
Corporation) and take over the Agency’s research
office.

GS/#/S5H Engstrom appeared tobe an
“insider” with anappreciation ofthe practical
side of codebreaking, its technologies, and the
need to keep high-level strategic cryptanalysis
within NSA.* But Engstrom was more an “out-
side” scientist than had been thought; he
remained committed to the belief that cryptana-
lytic problems could be conquered through scien-
tific, mathematical research. For him, data pro-
cessing, “busts,” and crude statistical methods
were expedients that had tobe replaced, not
something on which to base a nation’s SIGINT
future.5* And he still believed in the possibility
ofa Soviet Ultra ifsomething like “G’s” World
War IIresearch branch, which had brought
the nation’s brightest and most energetic young
academic mathematicians together, could be re-
created.

( That belief was shared by his old “G” col-
leagues and by many of the high science types on
the SAB. Since the demise of the hopes that ERA
would bea crypto think tank, “G’s” alumni had
made aseries of recommendations for the cre-
ation of an independent research organization. In
the early 1950s, Howard Campaigne lobbied for
the establishment ofa _ free-wheeling pure
research branch within AFSA. Its members
should, he argued, befree ofany operational
duties and be allowed to be self-directing. * C. B.
Tompkins sought a totally independent organiza-
tion which would attract academics. He suggest-
ed that itbe asubdivision of California’s Rand
Corporation.

€£5//85B Similar ideas were discussed among
the SAB’s members. The ideas grew more specif-
icas the board engaged more academics, such as
the fathers ofinformation science, Warren

Page 301
—~FOP-SEGRETHECOMINTHREL UGA-AUS-CAN-GBR-ANE-NZEHIE—

Weaver and Claude Shannon, and brought in
Cold War university managers like Jay Forrester
and A. G. Hill of MIT’s Sage Project and Lincoln
Laboratory.**

(U) Forrester and Hill had forged new rela-
tionships between technology-based schools and
the military. At the same time, others were creat-
ing the means to bring institutions specializing in
more traditional academic subjects into the world
of secret work. Among them was a close friend of
NSA, John von Neumann.

(48 Since his early days on NSA’s advisory
boards, von Neumann had argued for direct links
to universities. *° Bythe mid-1950s he recom-
mended the emerging Institute for Defense
Analysis asa model that NSA should follow if it
wanted cryptanalysis to achieve _ intellectual
respectability. He also wanted NSA to support
fundamental research in fields of interest to SIG-
INT (and John von Neumann). He constantly
argued that NSA had tostep inand fill the
research gap incomputer technology and logic.
He wanted NSA to fund expensive research into
ultra-high-speed circuitry and computer
design. *

€84/SB Such recommendations began to be
turned into aprogram after the Hoover
Commission’s findings were released. The
Hoover committee recommended an all-out
effort against Russia’s codes and ciphers and
wanted itto bea scientifically based one. The
commission could not beignored. Itand_ its
friends on the SAB were powerful and had the ear
of the nation’s leaders.*”

(P877ST) The Hoover Commission’s views fit
with the predisposition ofthe research types in
the Agency, especially those who had come to
NSA from “G.” They were poised and ready to
take advantage ofthe potentials ofthe Hoover
report.

Page 302

CFS}/SB-By June 1956, the “G” veteran Jack
Holtwick and his team had completed the
Recommendations for A Full Scale Attack on the
Russian High Level Systems.** The report, with
sections based onthe contributions of other “G”
alumni, such as mathematician Richard Liebler
(another University of Illinois graduate), asked
for millions of dollars for an intensified tradition-
al NSA effort to find a pure solution. The empha-
sis was on the use of high science and, important-
ly, scientists. Although Holtwick, with the advice
ofthe SIS legend Abe Sinkov, asked for
$17,000,000 for new computers and an addition-
algo0o people for anin-agency program; he
requested even more for fundamental electronics
research and for the creation ofa cryptanalytic
Los Alamos.*? He wanted long-term research into
super-fast computer components. Implicitly,
Harvest was rejected.

CESAASb Importantly, Holtwick recommend-
ed that a parallel “outside” academic program be
set upto tackle the Soviet problems. A simple
expansion of the Mohansic laboratory was reject-
ed. A Los Alamos type of program would call fora
“campus” and an academic elite.

CESA4S8B There was no immediate action on
Holtwick’s proposal for a massive in-house pro-
gram, but when Howard Engstrom took over the
research office at NSA in late 1956, he became a
determined advocate for the “outside” portions of
Holtwick’s plans. Sensing that the Eisenhower
administration would provide needed support,
Engstrom pushed for the Holtwick alternative to
Harvest and the IBM-based crypto-research. The
Agency began torefer tohis program as
“Freehand” as Engstrom lobbied the Defense
Department for a huge special appropriation.

(UV) You Can Take Science Out of the Agency,
But Can You ....

GS/45P Freehand was not a complete plan in
late 1956,°° but Ralph Canine wanted it imple-
mented before he was forced to retire. The CIA’s

—TOR-SECRETICOMNTIREL US A-AUS-CAN-GE RAND itt t—
TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL USA AUS_CAN-GBRANDNZEIXT—

drive to at least share inthe control of SIGINT,
the failure to predict the Hungarian invasion, and
the lack of progress against the Soviet ciphers
threatened NSA.” More fundamental, the tech-
nological advances in all types of code and cipher-
making seemed to have gone beyond the Agency’s
technical capabilities. Even the Larc and Stretch
technologies seemed less than adequate to save
NSA?

(584/84) Canine needed action. He quickly
began to muster the political backing the Agency
required. He summoned the Scientific Board to
an emergency meeting in Howard Engstrom’s
office on October 8,1956. Heinformed them of
his feeling that the need for intelligence was as
critical as in World War II and that another Ultra
had to be found. He requested the board to con-
sider what had already been embedded in Project
Freehand. He wanted something else. He asked
its members to provide answers to questions
from President Eisenhower’s office asto what
could be done about the Soviet high-level prob-
lem ifthe Agency “were not limited by money,
people, etc.”

(FS+/8B Canine had already gained the ear
of Eisenhower’s science advisors, including
Vannevar Bush. They were supportive of the out-
side high-tech, high-science initiatives within
Freehand, and Canine wanted to report back to
them with aboard-approved plan before they
might change their minds. 7?

€FS74SH) NSA’s Science Board listened to pre-
sentations onthe “science” components inthe
initial Freehand wish list. There was tobe an
exploration of the possible contributions of math-
ematics and the probable impact of more and bet-
ter mathematicians within the Agency. There
would be an R&D technology program to create
computers 1,000 times faster than the best of the
mid-1950s and an outside parallel cryptanalytic
effort against the Soviet cipher machines.?*

JTOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL-HSA-AUS-CAN-OBICANE HELP -L. 86-36

/PLL. 86-36
* EO 3.3(h)(2)

(F84/8B There was also something rather
sad. The board learned that the crypto-technolo-
gy tables had been turned. Nolonger was the
United States a dependent waiting for the secrets
ofthe British Bombe tobe sent from GC&CS.
Millions were to be spent to provide Britain with
a new comptiter so that it could continue its anti-

(£8#/8T) The board was informed that the
secretary of defense had already given his general
approval for the parts of Freehand to be conduct-
ed outside ofthe Agency. Then they were told
something rather ominous and certainly insulting
tothe old-timers inthe Agency. The DoD was
withholding its approval for the Holtwick/Sinkov
request to vastly increase NSA’s workforce and its
stock of computers. The DoD wanted to see evi-
dence that NSA’s staff was making progress
before it granted any more funds for a “business
as usual” attack.?°

(ZS445B The board shared the DoD’s views.
They favored abstract “outside” work, not the
application of more-of-the-same cryptanalysis.
They were especially enthusiastic about the idea
of a mathematical research program. They want-
eda Big Science of cryptanalysis to be created.
And they felt it could flourish only if it was outside
the Agency! Although the most vocal science
advocate, John von Neumann, was ill and could
not join inthe deliberations, the SAB went
beyond what Canine and Engstrom had brought
to them. While declaring that Engstrom’s idea for
acrypto-Manhattan project be immediately
implemented, they wanted something more:
commitment to abstract mathematical research
free of any specific problems. Howard Engstrom
also appreciated abstract research, but he and his
supporters within the Agency wanted that crypt-
analytic “Los Alamos” to be a massive applied

project for the Soviet(___Jproblem.

<467/Str There were variations onthe Los
Alamos theme, and it received different names,
such as “Project Parallel” or “Manhattan,” but the

EO 3.3(hy(2) “0° %8
TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL-UGA-AUG-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLI

essentials remained constant. The Soviet threat,
Engstrom argued, could be conquered if he had
the right people working under the right condi-
tions. With a call to duty by the White House, to
the nation’s leading scientists, with a budget of
$5,000,000 a year for five years, with a re-cre-
ation of the atmosphere of the old “G” group and
with the project’s scientists free from bureaucrat-
ic control, a Soviet Ultra could, he thought, be
created.

CES//S8B Engstrom began to win converts on
the board and, importantly, within the DoD.”
He obtained afirm commitment to funding for
the “outside” parts of Freehand. $25,000,000 for
“Lightning,” the hardware development task, was
promised. It was tocreate anew generation of
computer technologies: circuits 1,000 times
faster than the computer industry was producing
were central goals. The DoD promised that more
money was to come when the plans for the “Los
Alamos” research center were completed.

(U) Engstrom’s next, and very difficult, task
was to turn the Freehand dollars into programs.

6S) Although IBM’s John C. McPherson

resigned as chairman of SAB inlate 1956, thus
helping to avoid charges of conflict of interest,
and although IBM had established a high-science
program under the well-known Cold War scien-
tist Emanuel Piore, little thought was given to
placing the responsibility for Freehand in IBM’s
hands.®” There was some mention of IBM asa
possible site for circuit explorations, but
McPherson’s declaration that hethought the
1,000 megacycle goal unrealistic and the tensions
over the Harvest program caused the Agency to
look elsewhere.”*

) The question of how to run the Freehand
technology program was especially troublesome.
There was much atstake. Arepeat of Nomad
would bea disaster. Howard Engstrom felt that
NSA did not have the staff necessary to direct the
$25,000,000 project, nor was it, he said, even

Page 304

~FOP-SECRETHCOHINTHREL-USAAUS,GAN-GBR-AND-NZEE

capable of supervising contractors. He wanted
the Lightning project turned over to an outside
prime contractor who would handle all details.
There were discussions of using MIT's Lincoln
Laboratory, but its head and other SAB advisors,
including Jay Forrester, indicated the lab would
not accept the responsibility. Forrester suggested
the Agency create anew university consortium.
But when universities, such as MIT and Chicago,
were called on, Lightning did not receive a friend-
ly welcome. ”

8) No Lightning center could be created in
1956. The Los Alamos and longer term mathe-
matical research projects seemed to have found a
home, however.

£8) Through one ofthe SAB members, the
Agency had already established a relationship
with the General Electric Corporation. After some
discussions, GE presented its plan to create and
house at least the Los Alamos (Parallel) project
for the Soviet ____]Problems. if not the long-
range mathematical program. The corporation
wanted to have a workforce of 200 people. Eighty
were to be highly qualified scientific researchers,
and thirty of them were to be the most eminent of
America’s scholars. They were to be joined bya
cadre from NSA’s research group.'°°

€P8) General Electric’s plans were attractive,
but they were not turned into a contract in 1956.
Despite Engstrom’s enthusiasm, the NSA regu-
lars resisted acommitment toany plan that
would take its most important work “outside.” *”*
With Engstrom unable to create a captive corpo-
ration for the technological side of Freehand
(Project Lightning), all Freehand was put on hold.

£8) The halt came just as another threaten-
ing Agency review was to begin! The predictions
about that 1957 Robertson investigation were not
encouraging. Itwas known that one ofthe
Robertson commission’s mandates was to cut
military and intelligence budgets. With so little to
show in terms of results against its prime target,

PL. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)
—FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL-USAAUS--CAN-GBROAND-NZE——§

with the Agency’s super-advocate, Ralph Canine,
retiring, and with so many threats to take high-
level cryptanalysis out of NSA, 1957 looked bleak.

(S- Engstrom’s office reconsidered
Freehand and how to organize its work. At the
same time, SAB began its own new look at the two
main Freehand proposals and its own favorite, a
pure mathematics think-tank. Within the Agency
there was another attempt to establish how much
NSA itself should be expanded. The need to hurry
was Clear.

(U) Almost in Science — Would Lightning Be
the Other Harvest?

€PS74S1) Engstrom eventually devised a way
to organize the “1,000 megacycle” Lightning pro-
gram. Because ofthe way hedid it, he pushed
NSA over asensitive bureaucratic line in 1957.
The Agency became asponsor of basic research
within industry. “°*

484455) Lightning was a bold and expensive
program, but out of it, Engstrom predicted, would
come a machine 1,000 times more powerful than
the current ones. It would be powerful enough to
employ even the old unsophisticated exhaustive-
trial crypto-techniques ofthe 1940s against the
Soviet cipher machines. *”3

(#8) Ralph Canine had laid much of the polit-
ical groundwork for Lightning. He had turned
President Eisenhower into a believer. ‘4 Ike lent
his name tothe project, allowing Engstrom to
convince the DoD that NSA be given complete
control over Lightning. NSA was able to dodge
the DoD rules that fundamental research be
administered by a central agency.’

(FS) After afew months of rethinking how to
organize the project, inJune 1957, without wait-
ing for the rest of Freehand to begin, Engstrom
got Lightning under way. The project had been
changed during the previous months. To reduce it
toa manageable size, it was limited to the devel-

“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL USA, AUS-CAN- CBR AND NZLIK1—

opment of technology. The ambitious architectur-
aland communications explorations that were
part of the original Lightning plans were put off.

€&S) Howard Campaigne was given overall
Lightning responsibility.°° Along with many oth-
ers, he interpreted Lightning as a project aimed at
the eventual “development of THE computer”
NSA needed to meet the Hoover and Robertson
commission’s demands for results onthe high-
level Soviet problem. He hoped a machine would
be in the planning stages no later than 1962.

¢FS4/SH) Others, who were less accepting of
the idea that an Agency project could lead toa
revolution in electronics, thought that Lightning
would always be more ofa speculative research
than adevelopment project, atleast for many
years. They were certain that it would be impossi-
ble to deliver a machine 100 times more powerful
than the proposed Harvest, and they were
anxious about any hints that operational
machines would come out ofthe project by the
early or mid-1960s. They thought that a1,000-
megacycle computer was, at very best, a well-
intentioned dream.*°”

(ES4/S4) Making too many promises about an
NSA computer would, they thought, undermine
the Agency’s credibility. But Lightning began with
a 1960s supercomputer as a goal. Because of that,
the Agency wanted to keep control of all aspects
of Lightning. That proved impossible, however.
Engstrom was again unable to create acaptive
corporation, was unable tofind acompany to
supervise the entire project, and was unable to
hire enough people within NSA to run a tightly
controlled program.*®* Lightning had to be
parceled out among a number of contractors. *?

(F8773H But Engstrom devised a strategy to
get as much as possible from an essentially unsu-
pervised project. He decided to fund afew of the
most advanced research projects on ultra-high-
speed components in industrial and university
research centers. He hoped the additional funds

Page 305
~—~“FOP-GEGRETHOCMINTFHREL-UGA-AUS-CAN-OBR-AND-NZE—

would lead tothe emergence of technologies by
the 1960s. NSA’s role would beconfined to
financing the intensified research.

CFSA/55 Many research centers were contact-
ed before cooperative partners were found. After
hopes that Bell Laboratories would play a role
dwindled, IBM, RCA, and Sperry-Rand became
Lightning’s core. They were selected because they
had already developed expertise in three of what
NSA’s engineers thought were the “technologies
of tomorrow” (cryotron, thin film, and high-speed
transistors) and because they were trusted to
supervise their own work. MIT, Philco, Kansas
State, and Ohio State agreed to take small proj-
ects.

(F848) With the exception of a bit of work at
MIT, all the contracts were for technological
development. The design and construction ofthe
Lightning computer was pushed into the back-
ground, and only the barest sketch of what it
might be emerged within the Agency. But that
sketch reflected the long-term ambitions ofthe
in-house Freehand group: to develop and apply
more science and mathematics to cryptanalysis.
In general outline, the “1,000” had become a
mathematical supercomputer. By September
1957 the Lightning computer was to be “a gener-
al-purpose machine” without special NSA circuits
(which could be added later), and it would be
built atan undetermined time after the research
and development phases of Lightning were com-
pleted. That made IBM’s Stretch something ofa
competitor to Lightning. Fortunately for the
Harvest advocates within the Agency, a Lightning
machine was, they thought, years away.”°

(FS//6B- But the research phase ofthe
Lightning project was progressing. Because the
selected companies had already been working on
the technologies, NSA’s “research” began imme-
diately. But asthe implications ofthe goal ofa
1,000,000,000 pulse-per-second circuit were
confronted, there was worry that the program
would implode.

Page 306

CF8A4SB An oscilloscope that could measure
pulses inranges anywhere near the desired rate
could not be found. Worse, to reach the 1,000-
meg rate demanded that components be much
smaller than first thought — submicroscopic in
size. The basic laws of physics dictated it. That
created more than achallenge inan era when
“microelectronics” meant the ability to put the
equivalent ofa few transistors ona tiny glass
plate. The expensive “solid state” circuits of the
era held, at most, 100 components. It was to be
more than a decade before a miniature memory
circuit could hold sixty-four bits of information.™
Large size meant slow speeds. It would be a gen-
eration before standard circuits ran at 100 megs.

CS Lightning’s researchers looked at all the
possibilities for microcircuitry. They even
explored what became the world’s solution to
miniaturization, what we now call “chip” technol-
ogy. They found no immediate solution; but after
a few months on the first exploratory phases, they
all reported that “the prospects of achieving the
goal ofa kilomegacycle operation inthe not too
distant future were good.”™* There were reports
that a miniature circuit the size ofa pinhead and
with 1,000 components was _ possible.***
Contracts were renewed. The researchers focused
onthe technologies most likely to produce
results. Some of them seem strange given 1990's
solid-state technology.

CFS} One contractor investigated the use of
“resonant” circuits while RCA worked on the tun-
nel diode.“* Meanwhile, IBM pursued a dream
that NSA’s Dudley Buck had explored and which
other researchers worked onthrough tothe
1980s, “cryotrons.” Cryotrons were miniature ele-
ments operating ata temperature of absolute
zero. Such “cold” circuits would take advantage of
a fundamental physical property: With no heat,
there is little or nor resistance in certain types of
superconducting metal.

£8) Cryotrons demanded microcircuits, ones
so small that if laid on a fingertip, they would not

TOP_SECRETICONINTUREL. USA -AUS—GAN-CBR-AND-NZEKT
TOR-SECRET/COMINT/REL—USA-AUS,-GAN-GBR-AND-NZEH

be noticed. IBM’s route to such circuits in the late
1950s was through the thin film process rather
than through “chip” etching. Very, very fine layers
of metal were plated ona tiny glass base until a
circuit was “painted.” The component was then
submerged in liquid helium.”

S$ The other major Lightning contractor,
Sperry-Rand, concentrated ona more mundane
use of “thin film” technology. It was developing it
for use in room temperature circuits. The compa-
ny was already making thin film memories to
replace magnetic cores. The new memories were
1,000 times faster than Bogart’s and much cheap-
erto make because laying down thin film was
automated. But Rand’s circuits were very far from
the 1,000 megacycle goal.”®

(8+Sperry-Rand’s work was continued by the
Agency, but the research at some other Lightning
contractors was terminated within afew years,
perhaps too much hand wringing by the Agency.
The research on ways to speed transistors and
how to manufacture integrated circuits (chips)
was dropped in1959. NSA decided that since
others might explore the chip and high-speed
transistors, the Agency should sponsor only the
cryotron, thin film, and resonant circuit research.

GSAH8B Bylate 1959 there was so much
faith inthose three technologies that thoughts
of applying them emerged. There was a resur-
gence inthe hope for aLightning computer.
Despite the investment in Harvest, a group
at NSA was given permission tocreate the
$10,000,000 Redman project. It was to begin in
1961-2, was to evaluate Lightning’s results and
design, and was perhaps to build an Agency
cryptanalytic supercomputer. ””

(484/8B Redman was an indication that a sig-
nificant group within NSA had maintained its
faith in mathematical cryptanalysis. But there
was not a consensus about the role of cryptanaly-
sis. In 1957, just as Lightning began, some influ-

“TOP SECRETICOMINITREL USA, AUS; CAN GBR AND NZELIXt—

ential outsiders expressed a very different view of
the future of cryptanalysis and NSA.

(U) What Kind of Friend Are You, Dr.
Baker?

(FS//S The growing fears of Soviet capabili-
ties and intentions and the apparent inability of
SIGINT to penetrate the “Iron Curtain” led to the
creation of yet another NSA review panel in 1956.
It was perhaps the most powerful one that had
ever been called on and the one most directly con-
nected to the Cold War’s scientific elite. William
O. Baker, vice president of Bell Laboratories, who
was one ofthe nation’s “stars” of applied
research, was asked to head the review. He con-
sented, but only onthe condition that President
Eisenhower grant him extraordinary powers. The
investigation was to be under the White House,
and its reports were togo directly tothe presi-
dent, his science advisors, and the Presidential
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

(¥8478D Baker’s charge was broad, but it had
a focus. He was to inform the president of NSA’s
and cryptanalysis’ potential. Would a Soviet Ultra
soon appear or should the nation put its faith in
spy planes, satellite photoreconnaissance, and, if
possible, covert actions by the CLA?™®

(457781) When the prestigious Baker panel
was formed, both the research and operational
types inthe Agency thought they were to face a
group of like-minded friends. Baker had a back-
ground inintelligence and was already well
known to NSA’s Science Advisory Board and the
Agency’s top-level administrators. Although he
was not “told all” about the Agency’s work, he was
welcomed into NSA. But the assumption that the
Baker panel would protect the Agency was wrong!

C1S//81) Baker took Stanford Hooper’s ideas
about the relationship of academia to COMINT to
the extreme. Heeven went beyond the Los
Alamos and Parallel ideas.

Page 307
—TOP-GEGREFICOMINTHREE-USA-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZEIT—

(F387748BH Herecommended that NSA be
stripped ofits most important asset, scientific
cryptanalysis. Baker and his advisors were com-
mitted to science and scientists, but they wanted

them outside ofand away from the control
of NSA.

CS}/SH That led toa vigorous protest by
Agency insiders. Inthe early 1930s OP-20-G’s
cryptanalysts ignored Hooper’s “computers”; in
the late 1950s, after Baker’s recommendations
became known, there was much more than foot

dragging.

(TS4465 Well before Baker’s Top Secret final
report was formally released, word of what it con-
tained reached down into the Agency. The most
frightening part of the report was the conclusion
that communications security, especially the
Soviets’, had far outdistanced cryptanalysis.
There would be no more “great” intercepts. The
report insisted that the Agency recognize the
strength of the Soviet systems and stop
hoping that its cryptanalytic methods or its
machines would ever unlock them. More-of-the-
same cryptanalysis, Baker concluded, would
never work. Nor would a more-of-the-same rela-
tionship between science and the Agency con-
tribute much.”? Baker declared that the age of
heroic cryptanalysis had ended.

(F545 Baker stated that NSA should focus
on low-level systems and on integrating the frag-
ments discovered inthem. That was insulting to
Agency regulars. It was unacceptable to NSA’s
“greats.” Samuel Snyder, the man in charge of
Harvest, reported that when the legendary
William F. Friedman, “the man who broke
Purple,” heard of Baker’s recommendation, he
reacted emotionally and threatened to go to the
White House. Like others, Friedman did not want
the Agency tobe confined to being just adata
processor.**° For Friedman, without cryptanaly-
sis there could be no NSA.

 

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h\(2)

Page 308

(ES#/8P There was more to the Baker report,
and it was not pleasant. Baker recommended that
the Science Advisory Board be reorganized and its
outsiders given amuch more direct and regular
voice in Agency policies. By implication, NSA’s
researchers had not done a good job.

(ES/48B Even the Agency’s attempt to join in
the development of advanced computer technolo-
gy was criticized. The Baker panel urged the
Agency to drop Lightning and to end its role in
Stretch. Let industry and other agencies deal with
the general and fundamental problems, he said.

€8778D Baker wanted the Agency involved in
only two types of computer development. The
most important was to continue the automation
of signals gathering. He urged that the “front end”
of SIGINT be automated immediately. After that
was done, he wanted the Agency to concentrate
on the creation of special-purpose computers to
handle the torrent of “bits” the new front-end
would provide. And that new NSA front-end was
to include something that would truly make NSA
as much or more of a data processing shop than a
cryptanalytic agency. Baker wanted NSA to han-
dle ELINT, the signals gathered from enemy
radar and other electronic systems.*™

(F84481) Worse for NSA’s regulars was
Baker’s interpretation of what Howard Engstrom
was promoting — the “Los Alamos” cryptanalytic
project to work on the Soviet problems in parallel
with the Agency analysts. Although the General
Electric plan had withered, Engstrom continued
to want a parallel effort.

(FS/45D Baker’s recommendation went much
further, dangerously so. Hesought to take
advanced cryptanalysis completely out of NSA.
The Agency was toturn over the Soviet and all
other major unsolved systems. He wanted an
applied mathematical center, one with very
expanded powers. Filled with the best outsiders
and some ofthe outstanding mathematicians
from the Agency, it would have jurisdiction over

—FOP-GEGRETFIGOMINFHREL-USAAUS-CAN-GBRANB-NZEIAT-
—TOR-SEGRETHICOMINTHREL—UGA-AUG—-GAN-GBFUAND-NZEH—

all the high-level problems, as well as the duty of
exploring the frontiers of mathematical crypt-
analysis. Based onthe belief that even the best
analysts were unable to concentrate on long-term
challenges ifthey were within an operating
agency, cryptanalysis, he said, should be removed
to an independent campus.”

€PS4/5H That think tank was to have a wide
reach. It should be the site for advanced comput-
er work aswell ascodebreaking. Although
emphasizing the proposed center’s role in soft-
ware development, hardware design was not
excluded.

FS}/SH- Agency representatives accepted
the idea ofa quasi-independent think tank - an
extension ofthe older mathematics workshops
that dealt with abstract problems.* But they
argued that turning over the high-level problems
to outsiders would bea tragic mistake. They
warned, as Mrs. Driscoll had done in the 1930s,
that much besides knowledge of the mathematics
ofa cryptosystem was needed to enter it. And,
they said, sharing the high-level problems would
be wasteful. It would be better tocreate more
super-grade analyst positions within the Agency.

(ES#/8T) The protests did not work! Baker
and his panel were determined to establish an
outside center. Armed with a presidential signa-
ture, Baker made sure that NSA set one up. With
amazing speed, funds were allocated, a site was
selected, and acover name was created. Before
the end of1958, NSA had its think tank, one
directly connected to the world of the sometimes-
impractical academics. Within the Agency it was
known as The Cryptanalytic Research Division of
the Institute for Defense Analysis at Princeton
University. Outsiders thought it was a communi-
cations research center within the Institute. ‘*3

(U) Dr. Baker’s Half-an-Institute

CES4H455 The Institute for Defense Analysis
was founded in1956 asa means of creating a

“FOP-SECRETICONINTTREL-USA_AUS-GAN-GBROANB-NZEHNG

direct link between academics and the military.
MIT, Stanford, and other research universities
cooperated toset upthe IDA for the exclusive
purpose of serving the needs ofthe Department
of Defense. Princeton, with its beautiful site, the
Institute for Advanced Studies, and its proximity
to Bell Laboratories, seemed the ideal “campus”
setting. NSA agreed! But agreeing to establish the
new institute was something different from doing
all that the Baker panel had recommended.

€FS774S4) The Agency was able to quietly avoid
following many of the threatening recommenda-
tions. Only six NSA mathematicians were allowed
inthe new center because the Agency was deter-
mined to keep its own group working on the high-
level problems.

(48/458 In addition, the Institute’s mandate
was unilaterally shifted to abstract research and
to anticipating future systems, rather than
“attacking solely current problems.” Although its
founders were told they would be responsible for
advanced work oncomputer designs and soft-
ware, there was no intention oftaking all such
responsibilities away from NSA’s_ various
research groups.*“4

CES#45B And the work at the CRD got off toa
slow start. It took some time to obtain rooms and
then a separate building. More difficult was gath-
ering ateam of leading mathematicians willing to
devote part of their academic careers to cryptan-
alytic problems. Running the old summer insti-
tute at Princeton helped attract some academics,
but in its first years, 1959-1963, the CRD found it
difficult to keep even its directors. Some great
mathematicians served inthat post, such as J.
Barkley Rosser and A. Adrain Albert, but they did
not stay on.’

GS4/5H But the main reason for the CRD’s

slow start was the Agency’s decision to try to keep
the Princeton group busy on abstract problems.

Page 309
“TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-GA-AUS-CAN-CER-AND-NZLIIG-

Materials onreal targets were kept from the
CRD’s staff for several years.’*°

ChS4/S1) The quiet changes tothe Baker
panel’s recommendations about IDA were not the
only ways the Agency defended itself during the
late 1950s. Lightning, for example, was not can-
celed nor was Redman. More indicative of the
power of the Agency was the reappearance of the
Harvest project. After some rather sharp conflicts
within NSA, in spring 1958 millions were com-
mitted to building IBM’s version of an NSA com-
puter.

(UC) A Harvest of Overexpectations

CIS4+S) After ayear ofsuper-secret design
work inits version ofan ERA, the Mohansic
Laboratories,” IBM returned to NSA in May
1957 with its design proposal for Harvest. Soon,
there was a successful request for more Agency
financing to develop the mass storage tape sys-
tem, Tractor. But aformal agreement to begin
Harvest had to wait another year, and the major
financial commitment toit was delayed yet
another half year. The delays were caused by
more than quibbling over technical and financial
details. There were substantive objections to
IBM’s design and procedures. '*

€8) The objections were voiced as early as
1957 when it became clear that IBM had decided
that the heart ofthe NSA system was to be
Stretch, the computer that had evolved into a
super-speed number cruncher for customers
such asthe AEC. The proposed NSA Harvest
computer was not going to follow the architectur-
al specifications of Farmer.’*? The first “special”
part ofthe proposed Harvest system was not
going to be one of many “boxes” that would hook
onto adatabus, but anexpanded version of
Abner’s Streaming unit that was hardwired into
the Stretch.*®°

(Sf The in-house NSA R&D evaluation group
was not put off by the complaints nor by the devi-

Page 310

ations from the original Farmer ideas, however.
They chose to ignore some mumbling against the
Stretch component because they were so
impressed with IBM’s specifications. When the
R&D group used the paper specifications IBM
supplied to estimate Harvest’s power, they were
quite pleased. They calculated that major data
processing tasks, such as mass sorting, would be
100 to 200 times faster than on their most trust-
ed machine, the IBM 705. When IBM promised
that it could build the Tractor mass memory sys-
tem, itseemed sure that Harvest would be as
much as five or ten years ahead of what the com-
mercial computer market was producing. NSA, it
appeared, was to have its super data-processing
machine. *3*

(S Tractor was appealing. Its design hinted
that the Agency might have one great memory
that would allow the use of advanced data man-
agement tools. Tractor’s “data rate” was to be 100
times that of the best magnetic tape systems of
the day. As important, it was to hold an enormous
amount of information, so much so that it held
out the promise of being able to automatically
locate and deliver the backlogs of messages need-
ed for “depth” searching. Each Tractor tape held
the equivalent of eighty standard ones, and the
system had 480 of them. Tractor would automate
access to the equivalent of 39,000 regular tapes,
perhaps enough tostore all the Soviet mes-
sages. '3*

( Despite the encouraging news about
Tractor, opposition to Harvest reemerged in late
1957. One reason for the new protests was the
feeling that Harvest might undermine Lightning,
but much was caused by dislike of the close rela-
tionship between IBM and the Agency.

(8) While NSA’s Harvest team worked on the
various contract proposals IBM submitted,
Howard Engstrom became a major and vocal crit-
ic. He made his position quite clear, even in the
director's office.

TOR. SECRETICOMINT/ REL -USA-AUES-CAN-GBR-AND-NeEHKI—
FOR-SEGRETICOMAFHREL-UEAAUS-CAN-GBR-AND NZL

(@) Ashead ofNSA research, then asthe
Agency’s deputy director, Engstrom was
informed of the technical details of Harvest and
IBM’s contractual demands. He was not happy
with either. He and others felt that IBM’s tech-
nology was not really that far ahead of other ven-
dors. He thought TBM had a lock on Agency busi-
ness, and he was very upset by IBM’s insistence
that the Agency treat much of Harvest as “compa-
ny confidential” information. As important to
understanding his opposition to Harvest, he felt
that the enormous cost of the Harvest would crip-
ple other programs, including his creation,
Freehand. ***

( Engstrom wanted anend tothe Harvest
program or, atleast, the negotiation of better
terms. He took his views tothe director’s office,
countering the pro-IBM arguments ofthe
Agency’s Harvest team. Engstrom was forceful,
but the director knew NSA had already invested
too much in Harvest to allow areal showdown.
Lieutenant General Samford certainly did not
want to be blamed for slowing the delivery of the
AEC’s machine by forcing IBM to reconfigure
Harvest.*35

(2) IBM and the Agency regulars won the day.
Engstrom was overruled. And the Agency gave in
onmany Harvest contractual issues. IBM’s
refusal to provide rent-free equipment and to
forego charges for other typically “free” items was
accepted. Few penalties for late delivery were
demanded.

(Z) A final and very large contract was signed
on 15 June 1959. The Agency had already invest-
ed $1,987,000 inIBM-conducted research and
design studies; now it committed itself to an addi-
tional $11,400,000 for the Stretch computer, the
Harvest “bump” and the Tractor tape system.
Soon it added another $3,000,000 for additional
high-speed memories. °°

( That was not all, however. Within six
months IBM returned tothe Agency with the

TOR-SECRETICOMINTIREL USA AUS CAN GBR AND NZDIXT

news that the corporation had underestimated
the cost of the Harvest and Tractor components
by approximately one hundred percent, or
$5,500,000. 8” Then the Agency was informed
that delivery would be postponed indefinitely. In
addition, the Agency was told that many factors
had led IBM tosome “moderate degradation of
some parts of the system hardware.”

(@ The Agency was intoo deep; there was
little itcould do. Towithdraw from Harvest
would cause another Nomad embarrassment. But
the Agency took steps to protect itself; it negotiat-
ed a ceiling price for the Harvest component: The
government was to pay no more than $9,300,000
for it.

(@) Then an unexpected expense had tobe
accepted. NSA would be one of the first to realize
that Pendergrass had not been quite on the mark
in the mid-1940s when he described the future of
digital computing. Heand everyone else had
underestimated the difficulties and expense of
programming. As computers increased in power
and as users expected more from them, software
development was taking as much or more time
than hardware construction, and it was on a path
that was making itas costly asthe machines.
Basic Harvest software, the Agency soon learned,
was tocost more than the original price of
Stretch. "3%

(2) Because IBM had not promised to supply
much software, just what it had developed for and
with the AEC group, NSA had to find the monies
to create apowerful operating system and an
applications programming language that would
make the two types of computers in Harvest easy
to use. Those were big chores in the late 1950s.
The Agency spent more than $4,000,000 on the
initial software for Harvest. *®?

(@) It took several years to develop the appli-
cations language, Transcrypt (later called Alpha),
the HAP assembly program for expert program-
mers, and the operating system, HOPS. Pushed to

Page 311
—TOP-SECRETIEGHINTHREL-UGA AUS-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLIUX1.

have them ready for the Harvest machine’s deliv-
ery to NSA they, and the first applications, pro-
grams, were skeletons to be filled in over time."*°

(©) The software was impressive, however.
HOPS was one of the first sophisticated operating
systems. Alpha was also ahead of its time. And the
routines that gave easy access tothe data in
Tractor were innovative.

(48) But the clever NSA software designers
could not achieve one valued and expected goal
for Harvest, multiprogramming. Harvest was
unable to run more than one program ata time.
Other frustrations arose when it was realized that
Stretch could not run while the “bump” was in
operation and that programming for the “bump”
could not be turned over to nonspecialists. ”

€P8) While the software project was being
organized, Harvest’s critics intensified their
protests. Howard Engstrom and SAB members
continued tobe worried about IBM’s ability to
produce afunctioning machine, but they were
more upset byIBM’s power toconvince the
Agency to allow the company to go its own way
while it was working on NSA’s problems. The
stipulation that NSA approve the design changes
was not always, perhaps rarely, followed. The
Agency critics wondered if NSA would get an NSA
computer, or one that suited the needs of IBM.*”

#8) The Harvest situation reached a crisis
point in1960. Since Harvest’s beginnings, the
SAB had been concerned that IBM would not fol-
low its request to make Harvest, the special archi-
tecture Farmer computer. When the cost overrun
and contractual problems aggravated an already
tense relationship between the board and the
operating cryptanalysts, when SAB was informed
that Harvest’s software would besparse, and
when it was told that the machine might have to
beonly astopgap “transition to Lightning,” the
SAB became suspicious. When it learned of the

Page 312

details of IBM’s program management, SAB
decided to review the project.4%

(ES) One source of SAB’s concern may have
been a young Agency engineer assigned to watch
over Harvest’s development in New York. He
endangered his career by writing to the Agency in
March 1959:“4

“The situation here is now ina bit of an enig-
ma. Onthe one hand the agency would like to
make absolutely sure that the equipment which it
requested will 1) accomplish the job desired, 2)
work atthe speed indicated, 3) make the most
efficient use of components, 4)be as reliable as
possible, 5) cost as little as possible, and 6) be
delivered on the date indicated.

“On the other hand IBM desires chiefly that
only item 6 and possibly item 5 be satisfied. Only
as long as items 1,2,3, and 4 are consistent with
these goals they [sic] will be considered.

“To guarantee any ofitems 1,2, 3,4 or5,
the agency must evaluate the design prior to
construction. IBM cannot furnish information for
this purpose. They cannot because their delivery
date is predicated on designing while construct-

“IBM has so scheduled things and has kept its
cards so close to its chest that it will be impossible
to stem the tide. Any design evaluation will cause
delay. Delay will cost the agency money and com-
puting time out ofall proportion to the savings.
This is chiefly because the IBM machinery is
going too fast to stop.... As usual the agency has a
firm hold on the IBM leash and is being dragged
down the street. It is this reporters [sic] view that
if you want to control an R/D contract you should
pick a company other than IBM. If you pick IBM
sit back and wait to get something like the equip-
ment you ordered at a premium price. Don’t try to
direct, you’re only kidding yourself if you do.”
TOR-GEGRETICOMATHREL-UGA,AUSCAN-GBR AND NZEINI—

¥§) The Scientific Advisory Board demanded
an accounting. They created a special committee
in 1960. The Harvest program was so important
that the “greats” of American cryptanalysis,
Joseph Wenger and William F. Friedman, were
asked to head that blue ribbon panel.“® Their
selection reflects asearch for balance. Wenger
was noted for his sponsorship of “science” within
the Agency; Friedman was the illustrious advo-
cate ofin-house cryptanalytic work. Although
they had different perspectives, they agreed that
Harvest was far short of expectations. ‘4°

(S) The Wenger-Friedman report endangered
NSA’s research/development efforts. The report
might not lead to Harvest’s cancellation, but it
could make additional large-scale projects unlike-
ly. Samuel S. Snyder, who had been in charge of
the Agency’s Harvest group, was put inthe
uncomfortable position of having to rush to the
defense of the machine and IBM. He met with the
two “greats” and assured them of Harvest’s
potential to be aFarmer-architecture machine.
He then insisted that IBM had done an adequate
job of ensuring that Harvest would be reliable.
Snyder cited the many internal error-checking
systems inthe machine and the effort that had
gone into the quality control system for compo-
nents.

(U) Snyder then asked the panel to reconsid-
er its conclusion about the difference between ini-
tial promises of Harvest’s speed and what was
being reported in the late 1950s. He asked them
to realize that until there had been enough time to
develop sophisticated software, Harvest could not
measure up to its true potential.*4”

(U) It was Snyder’s persuasiveness, combined
with the fact that the Agency had already invest-
ed too much to abandon IBM that led to a contin-
uation ofthe existing Harvest program. There
was another reason. In the context of the expen-
ditures onthe Cold War, Harvest’s price was
minute.

 

(ES48B The radar early-warning computers
IBM was building had anear $1,000,000,000
budget. A single B-52 bomber cost as much as the
Stretch component of Harvest, and hundreds of
them were being built.’4* Even the new NSA elec-
tronic communications systems, including
CRITICOM to inform the president in emergency
situations, were minor investments compared to
the billions poured into the missile and space pro-
grams of the era.“#?

(S48) But there was something else that
few knew about that may have allowed the
Agency togo its own way and continue with
Lightning, Harvest, and in-house work on the
high-level Soviet problem. Something cloaked in
the greatest secrecy was going on in the Agency. A
hope with the name “Hairline” was shifting power
back into the hands of the “insiders.”

(U) ERA’s and the Shop-floor Cryppies’
Revenge

GSHSDB While SAB considered the merits of
the high-tech and high-science aspects of Harvest
and Freehand, Jack Holtwick was lobbying for
$17,000,000 to purchase stock computers for the
extension ofthe ongoing attack onthe Soviet
problem; five years of dogged work by NSA and
British shop-floor cryptanalysts blossomed into
what appeared to be a major coup.”®° In late 1956
the Agency “insiders” seemed vindicated.

(FSS) By early 1957 the existence of two

significant “bust” conditiong

their exploitation would yield much information
and lead toa pure solution. Then the rest of the
machines would be penetrated.

   

GS /sb) Immediately an in- -house’ “oversight
group was formed: Ray Bowman, Leo Lathrom,
and Marge Haworth took charge. Then Dale
Marston was asked to establish” the managerial
framework fora machine and processing complex
for Hairline. Few others, _£specially outsiders,

Page 313
P.L. 86-36

EO 3.3(h)(2)
“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USAAUS--CAN-GBR-ANS-NZLHE-

were told of Hairline. It was asecret within a
secret.

GS4H45H While the Freehand and Harvest
projects waited, Hairline took off. Designers were
set to work on six new and advanced special-pur-
pose machines. They had tobe advanced. Just
one of the searches for the bust conditions called
for 638,073,495,557,089,200 tests.*** By mid-
1957 three designs were ready. The machines
were architecturally innovative. They had to be.
Because the Hairline machines were needed
immediately, they had to use existing technolo-
gies, slow ones. To compensate, the designers
made imaginative uses of parallelism and multi-
ple memories. Even analog circuits were
employed to generate ultra-high-speed process-
ing from old technologies. 5*

CS446_ The group turned toIBM to take
over some ofthe detailing. There were thoughts
of having IBM build all the Hairline machines.
But as Hairline grew in size and importance, con-
sultants from other companies were called in.
John Howard, then an executive with Burroughs,
helped, as did engineers from Sperry-Rand and
Magnavox.**? Then, when the original plan to
have IBM construct the entire series of machines
was dropped, the other firms were asked to do
more than give technical advice.“4

(FSAHSH By 1958 it seemed that the NSA was
about to reenter the world of heroic cryptanalysis.
The Agency and its crew needed such a belief
because NSA failed to predict the launch of
Sputnik in October. That Russian satellite, the
world’s first, did more than embarrass America’s
Big Science establishment. Sputnik proved that
the Soviet Union could launch massively destruc-
tive missiles against the United States. America
required high-level intelligence more than ever,
and it needed it instantly.

CES4S)) Perhaps that iswhy the November

request tothe Department of Defense for a spe-
cial allocation of $20,000,000 for the first three

Page 314

P.L. 86-36
EO.3.3(h)(2)

years of the Hairline machine program received a
quick and positive response. Told that “recent
technical successes have resulted in the c yptana-
lytic reconstruction ofa
machine cipher,” which will make it “possible to
read approximately 11,000,000 words per
month,” the Department of Defense could not
resist. When it was informed that the CIA had

agreed to help inthe work, the project was even
more attractive. **

84455 Hairline had to be made operational
immediately. Luckily, NSA found a devoted
industrial ally to help do that.*° In a sense, it was
a very old one, although it was a start-up compa-
ny. Nineteen fifty-seven saw the rebirth ofan
“ERA” in St. Paul. One of the ex- “G” officers who
had stayed onat the Minnesota plant after
Remington-Rand bought ERA, William C. Norris,
led alarge contingent of frustrated engineers out
of Sperry-Rand. They formed the Control Data
Corporation. CDC was small but innovative and
filled with men who had worked on military, even
OP-20-G projects. They knew what cryptanalysts
needed and how to conduct secret projects.

(FS7/48D The CDC group had been frustrated
bythe poor cousin treatment they had received
from Sperry-Rand. Brilliant engineers like
Seymour Cray had not been allowed to turn their
advanced ideas into products. Unknown to IBM,
they had developed, on a slim budget, a super-fast
and rugged circuit design they wanted to use as
the heart of a supercomputer. The circuit ran at
2.5 megahertz, aspeed IBM was trying to attain
through massive expenditures. Soon the CDC cir-
cuits ran at 10 meg.

GS-48) That circuit impressed the engineers
at NSA who had been trying out an advanced
twist on Farmer since the mid-1950s. The goal of
their farsighted Dervish project was to create sets
of functional circuits, each to be built using the
latest miniaturized components. With the circuits
being compatible, it was hoped that entire SPDs
could be “assembled” rather than handwired.

—TOR-SECRETHIGCOMALHREL-UEA-AUG-GAN-GER-ANE NEE
TOP-SECRET OMINFHREE-USA-AUS-CAN- GBR AND NZI

That would allow NSA’s own engineers to build
Farmer machines in-house and to do so within
months, not years. The Agency engineers
achieved their goal inthe 1960s. Using the CDC
circuit as a model, they created their CADY cards
and were able to build twenty-one very effective
SPDs with them during the 1960s."*”

(FS448D CDC’s contributions went far, far
beyond CADY. The computers they had in mind,
what became the CDC 1604 and its grander fol-
low-ons ofthe early 1960s, the 3000 and 6000
series, used very sophisticated architectural
ideas. They led the company tobecome the
world’s leading supercomputer manufacturer of
the 1960s and 1970s. Its smaller 160 also cut a
path into what became the minicomputer market.

(S) CDC’s achievements angered Tom
Watson. How could a handful of engineers “and a
janitor,” he asked, beable to accomplish what
IBM’s teams of hundreds could not achieve? He
may have been angered by something else: CDC
became a favorite ofthe science-oriented men at
NSA and along-term partner ofits special-pur-
pose machine group, one which demanded and
financed the development and use of cutting-edge
technology and advanced architecture. **

(F377/8D Asin the days of ERA, CDC had its
secret rooms where the world’s most advanced
computer work was done by engineers with the
highest security clearances. The intimate NSA
relationship with CDC lasted unbroken for a
decade.

€£S) While it would supply NSA with its num-
ber-crunching supercomputers ofthe 1960s,
the Hairline project was atthe center of CDC’s
1960s crypto-machine work. Some ofthe
machines it created for the Soviet attack were
works of engineering art. Welcher, Coiner,
Pullman, Coleman, and Rudolph cost millions of
dollars, but were worth it in terms of cryptanalyt-
ic power. Although some cost as much as one half

—FOR-SEGREHIGCOMIAHREL—USA-AUS,-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLUX1__

the price of IBM’s Stretch, they were twenty times
as powerful. °?

CES) Using one of CDC’s super-fast general-
purpose computers, such as the 1604 or 3600, as
the control and I/O for the special-purpose com-
ponents, the Hairline machines remained in use
and competitive with the latest commercial
machines for more than a decade. NSA never got
its modern Farmer, which could easily link any
number of special-purpose machines, but the
CDC creations came close.

(48445) As important for the Agency, CDC’s
projects went smoothly. The company seemed as
devoted to the Agency as to its commercial inter-
ests. Italways kept the Agency informed of its
progress, and it delivered machines on time.

(¥87738H But the other major computer com-
panies played anearly and important role in
Hairline. The first of the[_Jomput-
ers, the $900,000 Blueplate, was shipped from
Sperry-Rand’s (previously Remington-Rand’s)
St. Paul factory to the Agency in October 1958.7”

 

CFS44SH Other machines followed. Sperry-
Rand, CDC, and Burroughs built huge Hairline
SPDS. One early Hairline machine, Haviland,
cost almost $10,000,000. It and its sisters rivaled
the supercomputers ofthe time in complexity
and power and outpaced the best commercial
computers ofthe 1960s and 1970s by factors
of 1000." |

(48/481 IBM was asked to rejoin the special-
purpose machine effort. In 1968 it delivered its
impressive Aztek. Although only two-thirds the
size of a Sperry-Rand SPD of 1965, its price tag
reflected its power. Itwas the attempt to put
Lightning’s research touse. ? Its high price
brought great returns. Aztek did its particular job
2,400 times faster than IBM’s commercial super-
computer ofthe era, the 7030 offshoot of
Stretch."°3

 

P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

Page 315
(U) Technology and Faith, 1962

(S) While Hairline was receiving its
first set of machines, IBM delivered
Harvest to NSA in February 1962 after
its engineers overcame an unexpected
and major problem. The critical special
core memory for the machine had
proven unworkable, and the Harvest
project had almost come toa halt in
mid-1960. It had taken additional mil-
lions and much creativity to find a
substitute that could reach the speed
IBM had promised. 4

CES4/S5B  Harvest’s arrival meant
that the mid-1950s faith ina techno-
logical solution could be tested. That
faith had put the Agency’s reputation
onthe line. NSA had convinced the
government toinvest more than
$100,000,000 inspecial equipment
and research toconquer the Soviet
enciphering machines. That was twenty-five
times what the World War II Bombes had cost.
Ontop ofthose special investments, NSA had
spent additional tens of millions ofdollars on
commercial computers. That included acopy of
the startling CDC 1604 for IDA’s mathematical
explorations.

GSHS) More was going on. The IDA was
beginning tolobby for access to real problems,
and Britain was putting its Freehand machine to
work against the Soviet ciphers. But no one was
sure that the faith intechnology and science
would be sustained. Harvest’s software had not
had a chance to show its stuff, and Tractor had
“bugs.” Harvest’s backers still had to prove that it
would be the fastest and most powerful computer
inthe world.**> The research portions of
Freehand-Lightning showed promise, but also
that some technological limits had been reached.
Cryotrons proved stubborn, and thin-film tech-
nology, though still viable, was facing constraints.
The IDA had not yet worked a methodological

Page 316

 

(U) Harvest

miracle and was just beginning toshow how
supercomputers could be integrated into day-to-
day cryptanalysis.

(#87784) The Hairline system was yet to

provide much. It was_generating only asmall
percent of the traffic |

 

 

 

| While valuable, Silver’s messages

contained rather low-level information.

(484/45H There were some clear triumphs,
however. NSA had continued its codebreaking
victories over the codes and ciphers of nations
other than those in the Communist bloc, reading
at least ofthe world’s.systems. And the
Agency seemed to be creating valuable informa-
tion on the Soviets through T/A, plain language,
and ELINT. 1

 

PLL. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

—TOP-SECRETHEOMINTTREL-USAC AUS CAN-GBROAND-NZEE-
“FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-USA AUS -GAN-OBR-AND-NELE—

GS77SH But the high-level problem
remained unsolved. The huge investments in
Freehand, Hairline and Harvest had, as yet, failed
to bring NSA into a new age of heroic cryptanaly-
sis. Some results were badly needed if faith and
investments in science and technology were to be
maintained.

(U) Notes

1.(U) Thomas Johnson’s American Cryptology
during the Cold War, 1945-1989 contains a valuable
review of the numerous reviews and investigations of
the Agency.

2. €f3//5H Thomas Johnson's work is informative
and (£8 NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA SAB Members
and Minutes,” 27 April 1954, is very useful.

3.(U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Trish Gallagher,
“Glimpse of a Man: The Life of Ralph J. Canine.”

4. (9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, DoD, Report of the
Secretary's Ad Hoc Committee on COMINT/COM-
SEC, June 1958. (Robertson Report) The Robertson
Report is housed in CCH Series VLX.1.6.

5. (ESH/S1) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd. (TS//SI) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,BSA, “MPRO Tehnical Reports,”
circa 1956.

6.466485 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of
Computers, List of Computers,” nd.

7.(S) NSA Technical Literature Series, Monograph
No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose Electronic
Digital Computers , 1964. The name Bogart was select-
ed because it was the name of a well-known newspaper
editor.

8.48} NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

9.46) NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigne,
“Aristocrat: An Intelligence Test for Computers.”

10. (E8448 NSA CCH Series XII Z, ADVA-13 “The
HEXT 13ABS Diarization Program,” 23 May 1960.
£E8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, ADVA-13 Tech. Rpt, “The
Devron-Pahala-Wyoming Mechanized Data Handling
Complex,” 23 May 1960. (FSA46-NSA CCH Series XI
Z, MPRO-11, “Reading Manual Morse on 13ABS

TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL-UGA_AUS,-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLLL

Transmission Via Digital Computer, 16 December
1960.

11. 3} NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964.

12. ($}+ NSA CCH Series XII Z,SCAG Meeting of
6 December 1951.

13. (FS} NSA AHA ACC 28690, “Members of NSA
Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,” circa
1953. G3} NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study-Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.
(6}NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA SAB Members,” April
1955.

14. S484) NSA AHA ACC 46406, “Recommend-
ation for a Full-Scale Attack on Russian High Level
Systems,” 2 May 1956.

15. (8) NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Diary
of Samuel S. Snyder, 29 October 1957.

16. (U) Canine had tried to build an SPD construc-
tion branch within the Agency that was large enough
todo all ofits own work, but Congress favored a sys-
tem of contracting out tocommercial manufacturers.

17. SAB NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Mechani-
zation inSupport of COMINT, Phase III: Third
Addition,” 1 November 1956.

18. (U) Thomas Johnson's American Cryptology
during the Cold War, 1945-1989 covers these points.

19. #8) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSASAB Mem-
bers and Minutes,” 27 April 1954.

20. (U) The Hoover and Killian recommendations
were, toa very great extent, affirmed ina third mid-
1950s review of NSA by William H. Jackson, who was
“keeping aneye onthe Agency” for President
Eisenhower. See Thomas Johnson’s American
Cryptology during the Cold War, 1945-1989.

21. (U) Hehad financed the successor to Howard
Aiken’s 1930s supercomputer inthe mid-1940s. But
that machine proved something of an embarrassment.
His SSEC of 1948 had too many technological com-
promises and was soon regarded asa dinosaur.
This experience may have led him tobe wary of
“machines before their time.” Charles J. Bashe et al.,
IBM’s Early Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press,
1986), 52.

22. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., JBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 132.

Page 317
FOP-SEGRETHEGMINTHREL-USAAUS-CAN-OBROANE-NZEE

23. 48 NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 45

24. (U) What isnot explained in the documenta-
tion is why, after rejecting the UNIVAC machine in the
late 1940s because it used “decimal” representation,
the 702 was so well received at the Agency.

25. (FS) The NSA group knew ofthe TPM and
found it attractive. When considering whether or not
toacquire a701, they were informed that the TPM
development was lagging behind, and its production
version (702) faced an indefinite birth date. (FS) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, folder marked “Machine Reports
1951-1952.” The 702 had an interesting feature, a bus
architecture. With the bus acting asa transmission
line, many separate units (ALUS) could be attached to
the machine. Charles J.Bashe etal., JBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 173.
This architectural idea paralleled the “Farmer” con-
cept that was developing within the Agency.

26. (FS NSA CCH Series XII Z, folder marked,
“Machine Reports 1951-1952.”

27. (87 NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers,1964. (S) NSA CCH
Series XIK Box 8,Snyder “Yearly Cost of
Representative NSA Machines,” May 1955.

28. {&) NSA CCH XIH, Box 12, NSA General-
Purpose Computers, alist compiled bySamuel_ S.
Snyder.

29. GS) NSA CCH Series XII X-MPRO, U.S.
Cryptanalytic Research and Development Committee,
“Joint Long Term Program for Research and
Development inthe Field of Cryptanalytic
Equipment,” 21 July 1948. 4684468 NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “File Kept by Dr. Campaigne on Ram Panel
Meetings.” 34484) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Communications Supplementary Activities, RAMP
Report II,” 21December 1948.” (8448) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Oral History Interview OH 04-82 with
Samuel S. Snyder, 24 February 1982. GSA¢6RH NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Joint Long Term Program (Old
Planning Material, 1948-1949)” compiled by Doug
Hogan.

30. (87731) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24

Page 318

-P.L. 86-36
/ EO 3.3(h)(2)

February 1982. TBS, NSA AHA ACC10842, Ray L.
Bowman, “Engineering Diary,” circa 1945-1950.

Bowman’s own ideas may have been: reinforced after
heleamed ofthe [-___] machine. which,

apparently, had an architecture quite like that advo-
cated under the Farmer program. (§+NSA CCH Series
XII Z, GCHQ, “List of Non-Hollerith X Department
Machine Descriptions,” 12 January 1953.

31. &} NSA CCH Series XII Z,Ray Bowman,
“Farmer,” 5 April 1954. CES+46t) (NOFORN) NSA
AHA ACC 28690, “BSA SAB Minutes,” April 1954.
The project began in mid-1954

32. (U) Especially enlightening are (F5//S1) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Report of Special Study Group
on Analytic Requirements for Farmer-Nomad,”
15 November 1954. 6} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “NSA
SAB Subpanel onGeneral Purpose Analytic
Equipment,” 7 March 1955. (F8+451) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “Mechanization in Support of COMINT, Phase
IH: Third Addition,” 1 November 1956. (Sy NSA CCH
Series XII Z, “Farmer,” S.Snyder 25 August 1955.
(37 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “HARVEST as the Control
Unit of the Farmer System.” A fundamental difference
between the typical computer and what NSA’s men
envisioned was its data flow. Most users had one data
stream, but much of NSA’s cryptanalytic work depend-
ed upon two streams. The old collator had proven so
useful because it handled two flows, and the Abner
streaming unit imitated many aspects of the collator.

33. (FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. Dervish eventually led to the
Cady building block components (which stemmed
from the CDC work). On Bowman’s plans. ¢) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,Ray Bowman, “Farmer,” 5 April
1954. <8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General Plan for
Farmer Program.”

34. 75448 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Report of
Special Study Group on Analytic Requirements for
Farmer-Nomad,” 15 November 1954.

35. (F8) NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Diaries
of Samuel S. Snyder, April 1954.

36. &) NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 73.

—FOP-GEGRETIGCOMAFHIREL-UGA-AUE-CAN-GBRAND-NZEHE
TOP-SECRETHCOMINTHIREL St, AUS-CAN-GBR-AND- NZL —

37. £ES) NSA CCH Series XIK, S$. Snyder, Diaries
of Samuel §. Snyder, April 1955.

38. () NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 20.

39. (S} NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
graph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers , 1964, 21.

40. {&} NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA SAB
Members,” April 1955. G&/°SD GXOFORND NSA
AHA ACC 28690, “BSA SAB Minutes,” April 1954.

41. (U) Charles J. Bashe etal, IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 418.

42. (U) The project began in mid-1954. NSA CCH
Series XI K, S. Snyder, Diaries of Samuel S. Snyder,
2March 1955 and 5 May 1955. CFS++S4445 NSA
AHA ACC 28690, “BSA SAB Minutes,” April 1954.

43. G68} NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, 3 March 1955.

44. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal., IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 418,
424.

45. (U) James W. Cortada, Historical Dictionary
of Data Processing Technology (New York:
Greenwood Press, 1987), 246, 108.

46. (C) NSA CCH Series XIK, S.Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 5.

47. &} Kullback wrote along report outlining the
critical processing needs at the Agency. @) NSA CCH
Series X11 Z,S. Kullback, “The Increasing Complexity
of the Analytic Equipment Program,” 12 October 1955.

48. (FS) NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, 19 March 1955.

49. GS) NSA CCH Series XI K, §. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, May 1955.

50. FS) NSA CCH Series XI K, 8. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, 30 May 1955 and 22 August 1955.

51.46} NSA CCH Series X1K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 7.

52. (FS) NSA CCH Series XI K, $. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, 22 July 1955.

53. (@} NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. Kullback, “The
Increasing Complexity ofthe Analytic Equipment
Program,” 12 October 1955.

54. (A455 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel §.Snyder, 24

TFOP-SEGRETIGGMIFTHIREL-UGA-AUG--GAN-GER-AND-NELIOU—

February 1982. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview
with Dr. Joseph Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June
1981. A useful article on Harvest is NSA CCH Series X1
K,(U) Edward K. Yasaki, “Fastest inIts Time,”
(Stretch), Datamation, 28 (January 1982): 34-43.

55. (FS NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, August and September 1955. (@
NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, “The Harvest
Story,” 8.

56. () NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 10. On views of the “harvest” system,
(U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr. Joseph
Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981.

57. (U) NSA CCH XIK Box 5 Samuel S. Snyder,
folder, “Program Descriptions.”

58. (U) George Cramer had been anavy mathe-
matician, however.

59. (U) NSA CCH Personality File. (C) NSA CCH
Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The Harvest Story,” 12.

60. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal. IBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 432.

61. (73) NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Samuel
S.Snyder Diaries 1May 56. Kullback believed his
directive tomake itan Agency machine, rather than
one to fit the commercial market, would be followed.

62. (S/S NSA CCH Series XH Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February, 1982, 174.

63. £54464) NSA CCH Series XU Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S8.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 183. (TS) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Notes on Farmer.” (& NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam
Snyder, “The Harvest Story,” 15e.

64. 2} NSA.CCH Series XII Z, “Farmer Plantation
Definition and Objectives,” 15 November 1956. At the
same time that Tractor was being designed, the Agency
was exploring the other mass memory devices of the
era. Predating its acquisitions of automated microfilm
and video mass memory systems, the microfilm Mini
and Magnacard options were examined inthe late
1950s. () NSA CCH Series XII Z, H. H. Campaigne,
“Research at NSA,” NSA Technical Journal (Spring
1968): 1.48) NSA CCH Series XH Z, “The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” 1 June 1965.

65. CES 464 NSA AHA ACC 36784, “Data Storage
and Retrieval Symposium,” 16-17 April 1959.

Page 319
“TOP'SECRETICOMINTIREL USA, AUS, CAN GBR AND NZLIXT

66. } NSA CCH Series XII Z, “HARVEST asthe
Control Unit ofthe Farmer System.” ($} NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Ray Bowman, “Farmer,” 5 April 1954.

67. (S81) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982, 183. It is revealing to compare the 1955
Farmer outline by Samuel S. Snyder and the Harvest
Report. 6) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Farmer,” S. Snyder
25 August 1955. The comparison shows that the
Harvest group focused ona subset of the Farmer-rec-
ommended cryptanalytic tasks, the “scoring and test-
ing” group.

68. (U} Note that later NSASAB panel reports,
March 1955, did stress the ability to work on two sets
of data at the character level. However, the report also
emphasized the “ancillary units.”

69. T@y NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 19.

70. (6) NSA CCH Series XI1K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 19.

71. Ue} NSA CCH Series XIK, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 28.

72. f€} NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 30. (C) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“Harvest Farmer Costs.”

73. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr.
Joseph Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981

74. 4 NSA CCH Series XH Z, “The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” 1 June 1065. 23) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “Abbreviated History of SCAG,”
February 1951-February 1952.

75. (3) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Notes, Anne Brown
Historical Study of NSASAB.” @£8) NSA AHA ACC
28690, “Members of NSA Science, Electronic, and
Mathematics Panels,” circa 1953. (4) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “The Origins and Development of the NSASAB,”
i1June 1965.

76.3} NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Notes, Anne Brown
Historical Study of NSASAB.”

77. (> NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Some Recom-
mendations for NSASAB Activities,” 6 April 1961. ©
NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Notes, Anne Brown Historical
Study of NSASAB.” (6} NSA AHA ACC 36784,
“Robertson Report,” 31 May 1957.

78. (PH) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA SAB
Members and Minutes,” 27April 1954. SA85

Page 320

(NOFORN) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “BSA SAB
Minutes,” April 1954. (©) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA
SAB Members,” April 1955. 6) NSA AHA ACC 28690,
“NSA Science Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.
(28) NSA AHA ACC 286090, “Members of NSA
Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,” circa
1953- (78) NSA CCH Series XIT Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.

79. (U) NSA CCH Personality file.

8c. (FS NSA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Samuel
S. Snyder Diaries, 14 October 1857 shows other “sci-
ence types” objected, as late as then, to giving IBM the
Harvest contract. One reason was that it seemed to be
turning Agency problems over tothe corporation.
Howard Engstrom pointed out in August that Harvest
was so large that it threatened to eliminate many other
projects in the Agency.

81. &) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Notes, Anne Brown
Historical Study of NSASAB.”

82. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr.
Joseph Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981.

83. (S}-NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigne,
“Lightning.”

84. } NSA CCH Series XII Z,“SCAG Meeting of
6 December 1951.” (FS) NSA CCH Series XIII Z,
“Abbreviated History of SCAG,” February 1951-
February 1952. (F544S8 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Notes
from “First Annual Review of Group A Resources,”
1962. €F&) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “Members of NSA
Science, Electronic, and Mathematics Panels,” circa
1953. €FS773T) NSA AHA ACC 36784, “Data Storage
and Retrieval Symposium,” 16-17 April 1959. €F&) NSA
CCH Series XII Z,NSASAB, “Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.

8s. (6) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“NSA SAB
Subpanel on General-Purpose Analytic Equipment,” 7
March 1955. ¢£8448D NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The
Accelerated Machine Program,” 2 August 1955.
CESS NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Mechanization in
Support of COMINT, Phase III -Third Addition,” 1
November 1956.

86. (U) “Remarks atthe Dedication of John von
Neumann Hall,” NSA Technical Journal, VI (Winter
1961): 1.428} NSA AHA ACC 42444, “Baker Panel:
IDA established,” 21 February 1958. (TS+4465 NSA
CCH Series XII Z,“Mechanization inSupport of

“TOP'SECRETICOMINTHREL- USK AUS CAN GBR-AND NZL —
TOP SECRETHCOMINTHREL USA AUS, CAN GBR AND NZUIXT

COMINT, Phase III -Third Addition,” 1 November
1956.

87. (FSA4S4) NSA AHA ACC 46406, “Recommend-
ation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian High Level
Systems,” 2 May 1956.

88. 484/84) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd.

89. 4 Holtwick’s recommendation for the in-
house initiative was oriented toa rather traditional
search for a pure solution that included asubsidy of
several million dollars for a computer for GC&CS. The
machinery he asked for indicates that the Agency
wanted ageneral solution and did not think the few
busts they had found would ever provide valuable
intelligence. For NSA he requested two 704s, three
7058, one Sled II, sixteen Audicos to convert incoming
signals, eight Bogarts for editing, one special
“Epicure,” two high-speed Dervish machines, ninety
small data conversion devices. ¢F8/7ST) NSA AHA
ACC 46406, “Recommendation for a Full-Scale Attack
on Russian High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956.

90. (}) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.

91. 48) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956. NSA’s “insid-
ers,” of course, had arole informulating Freehand.
OP-20-G’s Jack Holtwick was central to the project.
E8817 NSA AHA ACC 46406, “Recommendation for
a Full-Scale Attack on Russian High Level Systems,” 2
May 1956. ($S4/S4) NSA CCH Series XII Z, MPRO-
03/4, “The Hairline Complex: Part 7, Coiner,”
Prepared by Richard W. Ader, 1 May 1960.

92. (FS NSA AHA ACC 42444, “Lightning
Program,” 4 August 1958.

93. (£57454) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd. Project Lightning gained their and the
president’s approval inearly 1958 and inlate 1957
Canine could state that the secretary of defense had
already agreed to the proposals in principle. 6) NSA
AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science Advisory Panel
Minutes,” October 1956.

94. €PS7*S NSA AHA ACC 46406,
“Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956 shows how much the
in-house group counted onthe high-speed machine

TOR-SECRETICOMINT REL US AAW S-GAN-GBRIAND-NZLHK—

and how all of Freehand was shaped bythe Soviet
problem.

05. 8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.
On the details of the request for the in-house capabili-
ty, see Holtwick, (PS7/SBH NSA AHA ACC 46406,
“Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956. He asked for some
$17,000,000 in new computers, mainly to search for
busts. He asked for 900 new workers. The list of com-
puters Holtwick desired included many needed just to
turn the complex intercepts of Soviet machines into
forms useful in computer analysis.

Holtwick Requested:

2 7040r Atlas 2

3 705
1 Sled II
16 Audico
-”
8 Bogart
1 Epicure
2 Dervish

90 Data Conversion ($300 each)

96. (6+ NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956. S448 NSA
AHA ACC 46406, “Recommendation for a Full Scale
Attack on Russian High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956.
(#8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,NSASAB, “Historical
Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963. There was a
difference between the Manhattan-Parallel proposal,
which was aimed specifically at the Soviet scrambler
problem and the board’s plan for a mathematical
research center. See GS) NSA AHA ACC 42444,
“Baker Panel: IDA established,” 21 February 1958.
(6) NSA AHA ACC 36784, “Robertson Report,” 31 May
1957.

97.65) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.

98. (8) NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.

99. (} NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.

100. 8} NSA AHA ACC 28690, “NSA Science
Advisory Panel Minutes,” October 1956.

101. &S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.
TS}. NSA CCH Series XII Z,DoD, Report of the

Page 321
“TOP-SECRETICOMINTIREL Ha AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZCH—

Secretary's Ad Hoc Committee on COMINT/COM-
SEC, June 1958. (Robertson Report)

102. ) The office tocentralize basic research,
DARPA, was established in February 1958. Even
before then the services discouraged subdivisions from
subsidizing oftentimes-redundant investigations. The
ONR’s origins are connected to such motives.

103. €ES7/8T) NSA CCH Series XH 2, “Lightning
Research,” nd. 484484) NSA AHA ACC 46406,
“Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956.

104. (TS*4Sh NSA AHA ACC 46406,
“Recommendation for a Full Scale Attack on Russian
High Level Systems,” 2 May 1956.

105. [RS} NSA AHA ACC 42444, “Lightning
Program,” 4 August 1958.

106. (F&454) NSA CCH Interview with Louis
Tordella.

107. E8445) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd. Canine was informed that the five-
years project would not yield a“1,000” machine, but
he still aimed at major accomplishments. “...it is very
important that everyone realize that the ultimate goal
is a kilomegacycle computer, circuit limitations due to
the speed of light notwithstanding.”

108. 84/68 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd.

109. (FS4455 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd., 19.

110. (FS8A¢81) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd., 19. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z, H.
Campaigne, “Lightning,” 54.

111. (S) NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigne,
“Lightning.” (U) Stan Augarten, Bit by Bit: An
Hlustrated History of Computers (New York: Ticknoir
and Fields, 1984), 250.

112. (FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963,
28.

113. (FS} NSA AHA ACC 42444, “HAIRLINE,”
1958, 6.

114. @S). Afew years before and shortly after
Lightning began, the Agency tried tocombine cry-
otrons with the need for an “associative” memory, one
that did not use formal addresses and that could test
for near as well as exact matches. The projects at A. D.

Page 322

Little and General Electric were not operational suc-
cesses. (FS) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “General and
Special-Purpose Computers: A Historical Look and
Some Lessons Learned,” 23 May 1986. (Hogan)

115. €} NSA CCH Series XII Z,H. Campaigne,
“Lightning.”

116. (U) Charles J.Bashe etal. JBM’s Early
Computers (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1986), 457.
Points out that the Agency later supported very
advanced thin film work at Texas Instruments.

117. (FS+/S5- Leroy Wheatley “Content Addressed
Memories,” NSA Technical Journal IX (Winter 1964):
63. <8 NSA CCH Series XII Z,“The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” i June 1965.

118. 8* NSA AHA ACC 36787, “ASummary of
NSA Response to Recommendations ofthe 1957
Mathematics Panel Report,” 18 February 1960, 119.
8) NSA CCH Series XII Z,“The Origins and
Development of the NSASAB,” 1June 1965. CFS*NSA
CCH Series XI] 2, NSASAB, “Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963. G6) NSA CCH
Series XIK, §S.Snyder, Samuel S.Snyder Diaries,
28 October 1057.

120. (FS) NSA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder,
Samuel S. Snyder Diaries, 26 October 1957.

121. 6S} NSA CCH Series XU Z,“EDP Panel
Minutes,” September 1959-September 1965.

122, (FS) NSA CCH Series XIL Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.

123. (9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Cryptologic
Milestones on, NSA-IDA, SIGINT Communications
Systems, ACRP. (¥6-baeenie) “A History of IDA-CRD,”
by Richard Leibler.

124. (FS) NSA AHA ACC 42444, “Lightning and
Hairline,” 21 February 1958. The CRD would develop
one ofthe first advanced operating systems for
interactive computing. Its IDASYS was aresult of its
being the first to obtain a CDC supercomputer and to
having avery creative programming expert asa visit-
ing scholar.

125. (FS—beeenie) “AHistory of IDA-CRD,’ by
Richard Leibler. (RQ) NSA AHA ACC 42444, “Baker
Panel: IDA established,” 21 February 1958. (28) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB, “Historical Study:
Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963. ) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, “Report of the NSASAB Committee on Item 12,”

“FOP-SECRETICOMINTHREL USA, AUS, CAN GE AND NZD
P.L. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

4 February. 1965. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S.
Snyder, “Memorandum for Dr. Kullback-Harvest,”

30 November °1960. For an insight into the problems
ofthe early years, ($) NSA AHA ACC 36787, “A
Summary of NSA “Response to Recommendations of
the 1957 Mathematics Panel Report,” 18 February

1960. Ina December 1994 interview with Richard A.
Leibler at the CCH, he stated that it was some years
before the Agency agreed to.send any real problems to

the Princeton group. It took..amajor_confrontation
before the Agency released anf

Soviet problems to the CRD.

126. G4A4FEVE) Interviews with Richard Liebler,
at CCH, December 1994.

127. (U) IBM also maintained the old site in Vestal,
New York, which was constructing advanced SPDs
such asSled Iland Parson IV. The relationship of
Vestal to Mohansic and why there were two NSA cen-
ters within the corporation remained unexplained.
S485) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Office of Computers,
List of Computers,” nd. Also important is Vestal’s use
of the Farmer approach of having building blocks of
functional circuits asthe basis for its mid-1950s
devices.

128. 68-4) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral History
Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S.Snyder, 24
February 1982.

129. (FS NSA CCH Series XII Z,“Notes on
Farmer.” 687458 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “Lightning
Research,” nd.

130. t8>- NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

131. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with Dr.
Joseph Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981, 10.

132. (U) Inthe late 1950s the Agency was in the
forefront of exploring new database management
ideas. See, for example, the NSA symposium held in
1959, 4ESi/SD) NSA AHA ACC 36784, “Data Storage
and Retrieval Symposium,” 16-17 April 1959. On
Tractor designs, S} NSA Technical Literature Series,
Monograph No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic Digital Computers, 1964.

133. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with
Dr. Joseph Blum, “Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981,
14.

—FOP-GEGRETHIGGMINFHREL-USAAUS-CAN-GEROANE- NZETC

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL CSA, AUS; CAN-GBR-AND-NZEH

134. (U) Engstrom left one meeting in protest
when the IBM representative declared that all that
would be revealed would be “company confidential.”
Engstrom also argued against the major Harvest con-
tract ina meeting with the director, General Samford.
Others had similar feelings, () NSA CCH Series XI K,
Sam Snyder, “The Harvest Story,” 36.

135. (@) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 32-3.

136. (U) NSA AHA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder,
Box 16, HARVEST Financial Summary.

137. (6+NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 33.

138. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Interview with
Dr. Joseph Blum,”Harvest Software,” 19 June 1981.

139. NSA AHA CCH Series XI K, S. Snyder, Box
16, Harvest Financial Summary.

140. 6} NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story, Software.”

141. €-NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story, Software,” 9. 6 NSA CCH Series XII Z,
“EDP Panel Minutes,” September 1959-September
1965. €F9 NSA CCH Series XII Z, NSASAB,
“Historical Study: Lightning-Freehand,” circa 1963.
(484451) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “NSASAB Meeting,”
19-20 May 1960.

142. (©) NSA CCH Series XI K, Sam Snyder, “The
Harvest Story,” 32.

143. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S. Snyder,
“Memorandum for Dr. Kullback—-Harvest,” 30
November 1960. &§) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “EDP
Panel Minutes,” September 1959-September 1965.
£57451) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “NSASAB Meeting,”
19-20 May 1960.

144. €£$} AHA CCH Series XIK, S. Snyder,
“Harvest Memo,” Donald M. Rickerson to S. S. Snyder,
13 March 1959. 4454) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Oral
History Interview OH 04-82 with Samuel S. Snyder,
24 February 1982.

145. 49 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Ware on NSASAB
Mathematics Panel, 9 January 1967. CQ) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, NSASAB, “Historical Study: Lightning-
Freehand,” circa 1963.

146. (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S. Snyder,
“Memorandum for Dr. Kullback-Harvest,” 30
November 1960.

Page 323
—~“TOP-GEGRETHCOMINTIREL-USA AUS -CAN-OBR-AND-NZEE—

147, (U) NSA CCH Series XII Z,S. S. Snyder,
“Memorandum for Dr. Kullback-Harvest,” 30
November 1960.

148. (U) Marcelle Size Knaack, Encyclopedia of
U.S. Air Force Aircraft and Missile Systems, vol II,
“Post-World War Il Bombers 1945-1973”
(Washington: Office of Air Force History, 1988).

149. <8) B. Peters and C.Palmer, “RYE, An
Extended Capacity Remote Access System,” NSA
Technical Journal IX (May 1964): 77. (FS+461) NSA
CCH Series XII Z, ADVA-04, “Survey of Prod Analytic
Requirements for Mechanizing Baud-Based Opera-
tions,” 11May 1961. &) NSA CCH Series XII Z,
NSA Historian P2217 Historical Study: NSA’s
Telecommunications Problems, 1952-1968, July 1960.

150. (#8) NSA CCH Series XII Z, Edward F. Miller,
“Informal Note on Early Special Purpose Devices Built
at Control Data Corporation,” July 1993. Some three
percent of the traffic of the machine was
being exploited by late 1957. GFS-baeenie) “A History of
IDA-CRD,” by Richard Leibler.

151. (LS44828 NSA CCH Series XII Z, MPRO- ~203,
“The Hairline Complex: Part II, The Cipher Machine, ”
Prepared by James L. Sapp, 17 May 1960. .

152. (IS4454) NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The
Shearman Complex: Part VII,” Prepared by James L

Sapp, C425, circa 1960. (FSA/61) NSA CCH Series XI}.
*, Shearman Complex: Part VU,” Prepared by James L.
“Sapp, C425, circa 1960. (ESA/S4-NSA CCH Series XII

Z, MPRO-03/4, “The Hairline Complex: Part 7,
Coiner,” Prepared by Richard W. Ader, 1May 1960.
(P5751) NSA CCH Series XII Z,MPRO-203, “The
Hairline Complex: Part II, The Cipher Machine,”
Prepared by James L.Sapp, 17 May 1960. (FS+48))
NSA CCH Series XII ZMPRO-203, “The Hairline
Complex: Part III Clip Pin,” Prepared by James L
Sapp, 17 May 1960.

153. €F8445R NSA AHA ACC 42444 “Special and
Emergency Funding of NSA,” (Russian high-level
| circa November 1957.

154. CES4+4S1) NSA CCH Series XII-Z, Edward F.
Miller, “Informal Note on Early Special Purpose

 

 

Devices Built at Control Data Corporation,” July 1993. ~~

155. (S448) NSA AHA ACC 42444 “Special and
Emergency Funding of NSA,” (Russian high-level

| } cirea-November 419§72-----~

 

156. (27 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Herbert W.
Worden, “EDP Machine History,” suggests that CDC

Page 324

displaced Technitrol and other computer companies at
this time for special-purpose orders. Orders from IBM
for special-purpose machines declined, but it received
amassive contract for the huge and very secret Aztek
computer, the embodiment of much Lightning
research. (TS//Sl).(Lacenie-Neeen} NSA CCH Series
XII Z, Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical
Cryptanalysis,” August 1985.

157. GS4464) NSA CCH Series XII Z, LeRoy H.
Wheatley, “Cryptanalytic Machines in NSA,” 30 May
1953, and various years. CIS+481) (Laecenie-Neeor)
NSA CCH Series X11 Z, Glenn F. Stahly, “Fifty Years of
Mathematical Cryptanalysis,” August 1985. E5483
Leroy Wheatley “Content Addressed Memories,” NSA
Technical Journal (X (Winter 1964), 63. FF8S77SB NSA
CCH Series XII Z, “Crossland.” TRSLNSA CCH Series
XII Z (Library 3185024), “Hembree.”

158. (Q) Edward S. Miller of NSA kept a scroll list-
ing all the larger Agency SPD projects. It shows how
important CDC was tothe Agency for more than two
decades. See NSA CCH Series XH Z, “Miller Scroll.”

159. (797 NSA CCH Series XII Z, Edward F. Miller,
“Informal Note on Early Special-Purpose Devices Built
at Control Data Corporation,” July 1993. (C) NSA CCH
Series XII Z, Herbert W.Worden, “EDP Machine
History.”

160. (TSA4585 NSA CCH Series XII Z, “The

Z, MPRO-03/4, “The Hairline Complex: Part 7,
Coiner,” Prepared by Richard W. Ader, 1 May 1960.
461. £8) NSA AHA ACC 42444, “HAIRLINE,
funding,” 1 December 1960 shows the request for addi-
tional Hairline funds for $1,300,000 to complete the
largest of the early machines, Haviland.
162. (U) Interview with Mr. Ray Miller of NSA,

January 1994.

163. TTS77/9)-Ghaeonie,-Nooon) NSA CCH Series
XII Z, Glenn F- “Stahly, “Fifty Years of Mathematical

Cryptanalysis,” Adgust 1985, 75-6.

164. (S}. NSA Technical Literature Series, Mono-
grapli-No. 2, History of NSA General-Purpose
Electronic fe Digital Computers, 1964, 30.

“PLL. 86-36
EO 3.3(h)(2)

“TOP SECRETICOMINTHREL-USk -AUE-GAN-GBR-AND-NZLING...
TOP-SECRETHCOMNTHREL-US A AUE--GAN-GBR-AND-NeL Hot

165. (U) The direct commercial version of Stretch
certainly did not meet its goals. It was only abit more
than one-half as powerful as expected. (U) Charles J.
Bashe et al., [BM’s Early Computers (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1986), 373. Phillip Bochicchio remembers
that Harvest’s circuits were much slower than ten meg.
Interview, December 1994.

 

€0++-F040) «6 Colin Burke graduated from San
Francisco State College. After spending almost twenty
years as a professional musician, he obtained his Ph.D.
in history from Washington University, St. Louis. For
the last two decades he has been a professor at the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. He has pub-
lished in the fields of American social and demograph-
ic history, the history of higher education, quanti ta-
tive methods in history, the history of computers, and
the history of information and cryptanalysis. He was
lucky enough to be the senior Fulbright scholar in
Poland during the year Communism fell. Dr. Burke served
as Scholar in Residence in NSA’s Center for Cryptologic
History from 1991 to 1992.

 

 

(UF FOG) The Center for Cryptologic History
would like to extend its deepest appreciation to
Mr. James L. Boyle, who edited and "fine-tuned"
Dr. Burke's manuscript. Mr. Boyle served as a con-
tractor on detail to the CCH Publications Team from
October 1998 to February 2000.

 

 

 

 

Page 325
Page 326

This page intentionally left blank
(U) Index

 

 

 

 

5202 Machine — 161, 190-191, 223, 274

Abner — 2, 58, 248, 252, 253-257, 260-263, 278-279, 283, 290-294, 299, 310, 318
Adam and Eve — 108-109, 123

Adams, C.F. — 278-280

Aiken, Howard — 31, 58, 242, 250, 317

Albatross — 211, 224-225, 266, 274-275

Alcatraz — 176, 206, 208, 226

Alwac general-purpose computer ~ 293

Amber — 161, 184, 188-189, 192, 195-197, 213, 223

Amdahl, Gene — 296

American Machine Gun — 137

Arlington Hall — 70, 132, 135, 140-141, 184, 205, 214-215, 225, 252-253, 255
Armed Forces Security Agency (AFSA) — 264, 288, 272

Ashley, Dwight — 252

Atlas — 223, 242-248, 251, 253-256, 258-260, 263, 271, 274, 276, 278, 283, 290-
292, 321

AT&T Corp. — 14, 23, 300

Audico — 286, 321

Autoscritcher ~ 156, 183-184, 193, 195, 226, 248
Azalea — 139

Aztek — 315, 324

B-211 — 204, 266
Bachelor — 139

FOP-SECRETHCOMNTHREL-T6-USA-AUS-CAN-GBROAND-NZEHKA— Page 327
Baker — 256, 307-310, 320-322

Baker, William O. — 268, 307

Banburismus — 68, 78, 86-88, 91, 115

Bell Laboratories — 25, 46, 158, 300-301, 306-307, 309
Berkeley, E.C. — 249

Bigelow, Julian — 250

Binary-Coded Decimal — 291

“Black Friday” ~— 257, 271

Bletchley Park — 4, 55, 60, 86-89, 91-94, 96-97, 104, 117, 159, 188
Bloch, R.M. — 250, 260

Blois, Scott — 242, 273

Blueplate — 283, 315

Bogart — 282-283, 286-287, 292, 294, 307, 317, 321
Bomba — 85-87, 111

Bombe — 45, 55, 62, 68-69, 77-78, 83, 85-114,116-124, 127, 135-137, 139-140, 143,
145, 150, 155, 157, 158-160, 163-165, 167-168, 173-173, 176-181, 187, 191, 193,
204, 208, 210, 212, 219, 223-226, 236, 240-242, 266-267, 277, 281, 303, 313,

316, 324
Bowen, Harold — 14-15, 21, 25, 28, 56, 93
Bowman, Ray — 252-253, 292, 295, 313, 318, 320
Braun, Lieutenant — 173
British Tabulating Machine Co. — 88

British work on the Bombe, — 45, 68, 86-89, 92, 94-95, 99, 105, 110, 115, 140,
180

Brooks, Fred — 297

BRUSA pact — 92

Brute Force — 39, 48, 62, 132-133, 135, 154, 186, 264
Brute force searches — 85, 133

Buck, Dudley — 306

Page 328 FEP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL-TO-UGA-AUSCAN-GER-AND-NZLING
Buddy — 286
Bulldozer — 71, 118, 123, 178-179, 191, 193-194, 211
Bureau of Engineering (Navy) — 14-15, 17-20, 22, 33-34, 56

Bureau of Ships (BuShips) — 15, 47-49, 54, 56, 59-61, 105, 235, 242, 245, 250,
260

Burroughs Corp. — 270

Bush, Vannevar — 6-8, 11, 13-15, 17, 21, 23-31, 33-34, 36, 52-53, 58-59, 61, 233,
235-236, 250, 257, 264, 276, 282, 303

Cain and Abel — 108, 123

Caldwell, Sam —25-26

Camel — 132

Campaigne, Howard — 60, 236, 238-241, 244, 257, 267, 277, 281, 301, 305
Campbell, R.V.D. — 250

Canine, Ralph — 268, 287, 288, 302, 305

Carnegie Institution — 10-11, 22, 24-25, 38

Cherry, Bill — 257

Chief of Naval Operations — 13-14, 18, 29, 33, 77-79, 108, 114, 116-119, 121-124,
159, 193, 195, 218

Chi Square Test — 206
Cicero — 275

Cilly — 113, 138
Clambake — 138
Clark, Alva B. ~ 300
Clark, Mark — 288
Cobra — 94, 110, 180
Coiner — 315, 321, 324
Coleman — 28, 315
Coleridge — 228, 266

Page 329
Colossus — 45, 57-58, 80, 97-98, 109, 119-120, 123, 141, 157, 163, 199
Colt — 286

Comparator — 8, 14, 27-28, 30, 37-49, 52, 54-60, 63-64, 66-67, 70-71, 77-80, 86,
96, 98, 114, 119, 128, 135, 143, 153, 155, 161, 163, 172, 174-177, 188-191, 202, 213,
216-220, 235, 240, 256, 261, 274-276, 292, 299

Compton, Karl T. — 11

Condon, E.U. — 251

Connie Comparators — 216

Consecutive Stecker Knockout circuits — 137
Consort — 276

Control Data Corp. (CDC) -— 314, 324

Copperhead — 58, 60, 71-73, 80, 133, 153-155, 161, 163-164, 176, 184, 186, 191,
196, 213, 220, 222, 241, 291

Copperhead II — 58, 60 72, 80, 154, 161

Coral — 145-148, 150, 152, 160, 176

Countess — 276

Cramer, George — 297, 319

Cray, Seymour — 283, 314

Cryptanalytic Research Division (CRD) [of IDA] — 309
CX52 — 226, 268

Datamatic computer — 296

Daytona — 286

Deeds, Edward A. —25-27, 31, 56, 58, 108, 122
Deeter, Captain C.R. — 183

Defense Calculator (IBM 701) — 276, 290
Della — 275

Demon - 224, 231, 258

Denver Research — 275

Page 330 FOP-SECRETHCOMINTHREL TO USA AUS, CAN GBR AND NZEIAT
Dervish — 4, 293, 314, 318, 321
Desch, Joseph — 26-27, 31-32, 266
Differential Analyser — 10, 12, 27-28, 236

Digital recording — 1, 6, 11-12, 21-22, 24, 27-28, 31, 35, 41, 45-46, 57-58, 67, 88,
114, 130, 142, 155-156, 163, 166-169, 171-172, 176, 182-184, 187, 189, 195, 236,
241, 251-253, 258

Director of Naval Communications — 13, 30, 34, 51, 91

Double Input — 112, 138

Drag grenades — 113

Dragon ~— 141, 159

Driscoll, Agnes Meyer — 18, 49, 56, 59, 61, 309

Duchess — 276

Dudbuster — 113, 138, 141, 157-158, 189-190

Duenna — 71, 167-168, 177, 180-183, 187, 192-195, 204, 226, 234, 241
Dulong, Frederick — 43-45, 59

Dunwell, Stephen — 295, 297

Eachus, Joseph — 293, 296

Eastern Association for Computing Machinery — 249
Eastman-Kodak Corp. — 25, 40

Eckert, Presper — 57, 295

ECM (Navy cipher machine) — 114

EDVAC — 213, 237-242, 244, 249-250, 252-255
Ellis, M. — 250

Ely, R.B. — 95

Engineering Research Associates (ERA) — 14, 206-208, 211, 220-221, 223, 224,
226-227, 229-231, 235-236, 241-242, 245-248, 250, 252, 257, 259, 269

Engstrom, Howard — 29, 54, 269, 273, 282, 288, 300-304, 308, 310, 312, 320
ENIAC — 46, 57, 60, 152, 192, 213, 234, 236-238, 244-245

“TOP SECRETICOMINTIREL TO USA AUS-CAN“GEIO ANE NEL Page 331
Enigma -3, 4, 17, 29, 36, 47, 49, 54-55, 57, 60, 65, 68-69, 77-79, 83-95, 97-98,
100-124, 127-128, 131, 135-139, 142-143, 147-148, 150, 157-159, 170, 174, 176-
180, 183-184, 193-195, 203-204, 218, 224, 241, 257, 264, 266

Enigma Shark (M4) — 93

Evans, B.O. — 216

Farmer program ~ 218, 292-297, 299, 301, 310, 312, 314-315, 318-319

Fish system — 57, 96, 108, 111, 139, 190, 199

Forrester, Jay — 302, 304

Freak I - 130, 156

Freehand (Project Lightning) — 289, 302-305, 311, 313-314, 316-317, 320-323
Friedman, William — 4, 16, 22-23, 20, 31, 272, 291

“G” (see also OP-20-G) — 5-6, 15-19, 23, 33-36, 39, 43-47, 49-63, 66-70, 73-80,
83, 91-99, 103, 105, 108-109, 111-112, 114, 116-124, 127-128, 140, 144-148, 150-
153, 159-160, 162-165, 167, 169, 172-173, 178, 180-182, 184-189, 199, 201-208,
212-216, 220, 223-224, 233, 235-236, 238-246, 248, 258, 263, 266, 269, 271-
272, 277, 282, 297, 301-302, 304, 314

GEC codes —131

Gee Whizzer — 50-51, 61, 173
Geheimschrieber — 139

General Electric Corp. — 9-10, 25, 304
Giant — 118, 177, 180, 194

Gingerich, Hugh — 253

Goldberg — 27, 29, 58, 78, 142, 213-214, 221-224, 229-230, 233, 236, 240, 245-
247, 257-260, 264

Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) — 86, 115, 129, 135, 137-142, 146
178, 194, 266, 303, 321

Grandad — 177-178, 226

Grapevine — 183

Gray Manufacturing Co. — 60, 70-71, 73-74, 79-80
Gray-NCR Comparator — 73, 135, 161, 189-190

Page 332 —FOP-SECRETHCONINTHREL-TO-UGA AUS, CAN-GBR-ANE- NEE
Green, James —215
Grenades — 112-114, 124, 137-138, 174, 209 "BO 3.3(h)(2)
Grier, Herbert E. — 38 aa an P.L. 86-36

Gypsy — 142, 149, 160

 

 

 

 

Hairline — 313-317, 321-322, 324

Hall, Marshall — 273-274, 282

Harvest — 3, 4, 261, 289, 296, 298-302, 304-308, 310-314, 316-319, 321, 323-325
Haviland — 315, 324

Haworth, Marge — 313

Hebern Cipher Machine — 17

Hecate — 208-211, 226, 275

Herwitz, Paul S. — 297

Hiawatha — 224, 231, 267

Highley, Albert — 217

Hofgaard relay computer — 26, 31

Hogan Laboratories — 223

Holtwick, Jack — 34, 56-57, 302, 313, 321

Honeywell Corp. — 31-32, 56, 58, 60, 280

Hooper, Stanford — 6-7, 12-23, 25, 28-30, 33-35, 43, 54-56, 272, 282, 307
Hoover Commission — 268, 288, 302

HOPS (Harvest Operating System) — 312

Howard, John — 45-50, 52-54, 241-242, 270, 274, 314

Hut 8 — 86-87

Hypo — 68-70, 78-79, 96, 112, 125, 138, 176, 188-189, 195, 197, 223, 230

IBM Corp. — 264, 271, 275-278, 289-292, 295-299, 304, 306, 310-316,
320, 323-324

TOPR_SECRETICOMINTUREL TOUSA AUS CAN GE RAN DNZ HX 1 Page 333
IBM 603 — 207-298

IBM 701 — 278, 290

IBM 702 — 291-292, 318

IBM 704 — 291, 321

IBM 705 — 310

Icky — 66-70, 73, 78, 184, 188-190, 195, 197, 223
Index of Coincidence — 23, 36, 38, 63, 77, 86, 147, 185
Index of Coincidence Machine — 23, 63, 77

Institute for Advanced Study — 236-238, 250
Isomorph — 23, 31, 39, 65-66, 80, 128, 135, 147, 191

Jackson, Dugald — 9

Jade — 79, 144-148, 150, 160, 173-174, 176
Jaeger, Jerry — 37

“Jeeping” — 154, 164-165

JMA — 132, 156

JN-11 — 162

JN-25 (Japanese Naval Code) — 120, 162
JN37 — 166, 185-189

JN-39 (Japanese merchant ship/navy additive system) — 161
JN87 — 148-149

JN157 — 145, 147, 160

JNA10 — 146

JNA20 — 146-147, 160

Japanese Fleet General-Purpose Code — 150
Joos polygraphic counter — 141

Jumbo Bombe — 137

Page 334 FOP-SECRETHEGMINTHREL-TF0-U6 A AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLIXI
Keen, Harold (“Doc”) — 88-89, 94
Kershner, Walter — 38

Kettering, Charles Boss — 25-26

Killian, James R. — 61, 289

Kryha — 141

Kryha decipherer — 141

Kullback, Solomon — 275, 296-297, 300

Lathrom, Leo — 313

Lawless, William ~ 297

Letterwriter (CXCO) — 75, 104, 141-142, 145, 147, 149, 179
Liebler, Richard — 302, 323

Limited Selector — 132

Logistics Research — 293

Longfellow — 224-225, 227, 231, 266-267, 281
Longitudinal Differencing machine — 141

Los Alamos (Parallel) project — 298, 302-304, 307-308
Lubkin, Samuel — 252-253

Lulu — 257

M8 — 104, 122

Mg —- 104, 122, 132

Macdonald, Waldron Shapleigh — 29, 38, 42-44, 56-59,

Madame X (“003”) — 118, 136-140, 157, 164-165, 168, 177, 202, 204, 211, 217
Magic 3-5, 56, 90, 115, 120, 128, 132, 155, 199-200, 202, 204, 265, 268
Mamba — 142, 149-150, 161

Mammoth — 105, 110, 118

Mark — 194

—FOP-SEGRETHIGOMINTHREL-FO-UGA AUS ~GAN-GB RAND NEE Page 335
Mark II — 154, 161

Marston, Dale — 297, 313

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) — 128-129, 135, 153-156, 165, 168
235, 241-242, 246, 259, 267, 302, 304, 306, 309, 317-319, 322, 325

Mathew — 81

Mauchly, John — 80, 156, 192, 236, 238, 250, 272

May, William — 249

McPherson, John C. — 274, 294, 304

Meader, Ralph — 270

Meccano — 287

Mercury — 73, 171-173, 178, 184-185, 187, 192, 212, 241, 258

Mercury Full Selector — 171

Mike — 76, 79, 156, 205, 220, 222

Millikan, Robert — 9

Mistress — 276

Mona —188

Monogram — 194, 219, 225-226, 228-231, 243, 245, 259, 276, 281-282

Moore School — 234, 236-238, 257

Murdock — 275

National Academy of Sciences — 18, 24
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics — 10, 14, 26

National Bureau of Standards — 11, 13, 21, 208, 241, 243-244, 249, 251-254, 261,
270

National Cash Register (NCR) — 26, 120, 122, 148, 168, 173, 181, 186-187, 206,
217, 219-220, 275, 282

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) — 8, 10, 24, 27, 45, 192, 200, 236,
272

National Electronics Laboratory — 219

Page 336 —FOP-GEGRETFIGOMIFFHREL TO USA AUS-CAN-GBRANE-NZETAT—
National Research Council — 10, 14, 24
National Science Foundation — 8, 28

National Security Agency (NSA) — 1, 3, 5, 264-267, 271, 275-280, 285-292,
294-317
National Union Radio 276

Naval Computing Machine Laboratory (NCML) — 55, 83, 105, 148, 159, 170, 192-
193, 205, 218-220, 229-230, 258-259, 269, 271, 282

Naval Research Laboratory — 13, 15, 20, 25, 192, 219, 229

Navy Change (NC) Machines — 74, 151, 153, 167

Neely — 260, 286

Neumann, John von — 236-238, 250, 258, 288, 302-303, 320

New London Research Laboratory — 9

Noble, Lieutenant — 164

Nomad — 229, 265, 276-280, 283, 285-287, 291-293, 298-299, 304, 311, 318
NORC — 278, 290

Norris, Bill — 219, 259-260

NSA Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) — 285

Oano Company — 70

Office of Naval Intelligence (ONT) — 15-16

Office of Naval Research — 14-15, 28, 56, 79, 219, 229, 242
Office of Research and Inventions — 15, 47, 59, 200

Office of Scientific Research and Development — 24, 27, 45
O'Malley — 206-208, 226, 233, 281

Ophis — 224

OP-20-G — 5-6, 15-23, 27-30, 33-37, 39, 43-47, 49-63, 66-71, 73-80, 83, 90-99
102, 105, 108-112, 114, 116-124, 127-130, 135-136, 138-140, 142, 144-148, 150,
152-153, 155-165, 168-169, 171, 173, 176-178, 181, 184-185, 189, 191-193, 200-
201, 206, 208, 210-211, 215, 217-221, 223, 225-226, 229-230, 233, 235, 237-
239, 241-242, 244-245, 247, 249-250, 253, 257, 259-260, 263, 266-270, 272

TOP SECRETIICOMINTIREL TOUS, AtS-CAN-GBROAND-NZEE Page 337
276, 281, 283, 298, 300-301, 308, 314, 321
OP-20-G-Y — 15
Opal — 142
Orlando — 286
Oyster Schuker — 138
Palmer, Ralph L. — 274, 276, 290-291, 295
Parke, Commander L.W. — 143
Parker, John — 270-271
Pearson, Drew — 271
Pendergrass, James T. — 236, 238-243, 247, 249, 251, 257-258, 260
Philco Corp. — 81, 294
Pink — 224
PIT system — 279
Plantation — 297-298, 300-301, 319
Pluggable reflector — 84, 180, 182-183, 194
Pluggable-Series Grenade — 113
Pluto — 267
Pogoda — 266
Polish attack on Enigma — 84-86
Polygrenade — 113
Pomerene, James — 297
Powers — 18-19
Pullman — 315

Purple — 4, 31, 36, 44, 59-60, 90, 128-129, 131, 141-142, 144-147, 203, 224, 264,
266, 308

Purple Dudbuster — 141
Python — 142, 146-148, 193

Page 338 FOPR-GEGRETIGOMINFIREL-TO-UGA-AUE,GAN-GBR-AND-NZEE
Query — 113
Rachman, Jan — 234, 244

Radio Corporation of America (RCA) — 219, 222, 234-236, 239, 241, 243-244,
250, 257-258, 272, 283, 306

RAM-2 — 64, 77-78

Rapid Analytical Machine (RAM) — 33, 196-197, 204-205, 211-212, 219, 221, 223
225-231

Rapid Arithmetical Machine — 26, 35

Rapid Document Selector — 64

Rapid Machines — 45, 47, 53-55, 71-73, 76-77, 83, 99, 106, 129, 151
Rapid Machines program — 45, 83, 99

Rapid Selector — 35, 61, 79, 189, 270

Rattler — 160, 173-177, 192-193

Raven, Frank — 173

Raytheon Corp. — 248, 250-252, 256, 260-261, 278-280, 285-286, 296
RCA Selectron tube — 243

Red Code (Japanese) — 19, 150

Redman project — 307

Redmond, Captain — 51

Remington-Rand Corp. — 19, 57, 272, 278, 282, 286, 294-295, 297-298, 301,
314-315

Research Corporation of New York City — 11

REVAC — 252

Robertson, H.P. — 285

Robin — 147, 190, 223, 225, 275, 282

Robinson (Heath) — 58, 80, 97-98, 109, 119, 122, 190
Rob Roy — 287, 294

Rochefort, Joseph J. — 152

Rockefeller Differential Analyser ~ 12

TOR SECRETICOMINTR EL TOUS A-AUS-CAN-GBR-AND-NZLHN4— Page 339
Page 340

Rockefeller Foundation —12, 24, 46, 219
Rogers, William Barton — 7-8

Rogue system — 293

Roseboro, Mary — 249

Rosen, Leo — 249

Rowlett, Frank — 23, 59-60, 273
Rudolph — 315

Safford, Laurance F. — 270

Satyr — 141, 159

Schmitt, Samuel — 297

Scritching — 87, 115, 181

SEAC — 253-256, 261

Seiler, Don — 44, 153-154

Selective Square — 132

Selector — 14, 28, 35, 58, 61, 64, 67, 73, 79-80, 132, 161-162, 164-166, 257, 270
Self-Detector — 113

Serpent — 176-176, 193

Shannon, Claude — 274, 303

Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) — 22, 127, 286, 292, 295-297, 302
SIGSALY — 140

Simple Frequency Counter — 76

Sinkov, Abraham — 273

Skate — 214, 216-217, 223, 228

Skinner, John — 75, 153

Sled — 4, 213-218, 221-223, 227-228, 233-234, 240, 245, 253, 259, 274, 279, 289
292-293, 299, 321, 323

Slide Run — 132-135, 151, 153-154, 156, 160-161, 164, 167, 189, 191
Slide Run machine — 132-134, 151, 153-154, 156, 161, 167, 189, 191
Sliding Grenade — 113
Smith, Lybrand — 15

Snyder, Samuel S. — 2-3, 6, 29, 31, 58, 249, 257, 259-262, 284, 293, 313, 317-320,
322-323

Solo — 294, 296-297
Special Cryptologic Advisory Group (SCAG) — 273, 285, 300, 317, 320
Squelcher — 113

Steinhardt, Lawrence — 59, 71, 73, 79, 145, 148, 153, 155, 164, 167, 173, 175-176,
186, 235

Stethoscope — 257

Stibitz, George — 25, 157

Stone, Earl — 272, 267, 277

Stratton, Samuel W. — 8, 10-11, 13, 251
“Stretch” project — 297

“Super” project — 184

Swallow — 286

Tampa — 286

Tan — 284

Tape Processing Computer (TPM) — 290

Taylor, Richard — 37-38

Technitrol — 253, 256, 275, 286, 290, 324

Tessie — 64-68, 77-78, 96, 135, 143, 147, 153, 176, 189, 190-191
Tiltman, John — 92

Tompkins, C.B. — 235, 242, 269-270, 273-274, 282, 301
Topaz — 149-150, 160

Tordella, Louis — 242, 322

Tractor — 298, 310-312, 316, 319, 323

Page 341
Page 342

Transcrypt (Alpha) — 311

Tune-Seek — 287

Tunny — 4, 116, 119, 141, 155, 159, 190, 223, 227, 257
Turing, Alan — 242, 250

U-boats — 54, 91, 93, 99, 105, 108
Uhr Box — 84
UKUSA agreement — 92

Ultra — 3-4, 6, 26, 45, 47, 49, 55-56, 61-62, 83, 86, 89, 92-94, 99, 103-105, 108,
111, 114-116, 120, 122, 124, 128-129, 135, 142, 155, 201, 257, 264-265, 267-268,
282, 289, 301, 303-304, 307

Uncle Dick — 183
Uncle Walter — 112, 194

UNIVAC — 38, 57, 192, 208, 238-239, 241-242, 250-251, 260, 272, 278, 289, 295
318

Universal Plugboard — 113

Venona — 265-266, 276
Viper — 142, 144-145, 147, 160, 173, 193
Vivian — 275

WACS — 132

Warlock I— 210

Watson, Tom — 278, 289-290, 315

Weaver, Warren — 301-302

Welcher — 315

Welchman, Gordon — 29, 60, 86, 88-89, 95, 109, 114-115
Wenger, Joseph — 235-236, 241, 269, 271, 273, 282, 300, 313
Western Electric — 25, 136, 157, 250
Whirlwind — 192, 227, 241-242, 246, 267
Wiener, Norbert — 9

Williams, Harry N. — 26, 31-32
Wynn-Williams — 94, 97-98, 110, 118
Yardley, Herbert — 19, 127

“FOP-GECRETICOMINTAREL TO USA AUS, CAN-GBR-AND NZD Page 343
This page intentionally left blank

Page 344
