THE ENGLISH GIRL

THE AMAZING DEATH

THE first thing he said when she came into the room was:

"My father is dead," and the announcement stayed her at the door, her hands falling to her side,
open, as if, though a moment before they would have known their place and have lain upon the
two shoulders of the man she was to marry, now, so new a creature did this announcement make
him seem, that she had, at least for a moment, to hesitate as to whether he could still belong to
her. It was under the definite spell of that feeling that she uttered the words:

"Oh dear! " - words that implied more than anything else - " tell me all: tell me the worst!"

And he was so sensitive to her moods that he, too, neither made to take her into his arms nor to
utter an endearment.

"I am the richest citizen in the world, for what it's worth," he said, with a flavour of scorn, as if
he were quoting the words of a man for whom he had an infinite contempt.

She sank down upon one of the hard-seated, fine, mahogany chairs before she uttered the word
"How - !" But she was unable to furnish any adjective. The situation was beyond her: she could
say neither " How tremendous!" "How terrible!" nor yet "How magnificent!"

You may guess at a person's character very efficiently by considering his first abstract remark
upon any given happening. Tall, rather dark, with rounded cheeks, hair arranged high on her
head, tight-fitting park dress, and a slow, elastic gait, and with her self-control and her clear lines
 - she was called Eleanor Greville - you could not deny the epithet "fine" to her, or to the room
or to the atmosphere that surrounded her. And four days before she would at least have been
ready to give as much insight into her personality: she would at least have been able to utter some
moralisation if she had heard that overwhelming wealth had fallen to the share of any of her
intimates.

But, from the Monday on which the first news of his father's death had been cabled from across
the water, she had seemed to be lifted out of contact with her own personality. The death had
been denied on Tuesday, re-affirmed on the Wednesday by indignant Transatlantic journalists,
and redenied on the Thursday by vastly more indignant Wall Street authorities, who claimed to
have 'seen him " the night before. So that she had not known whether it would be necessary for
her to face the new position, terrible or beneficent, till that moment. She had not faced it: neither
had he given her any assistance.

He had explained to her that the report of his father's death might be true: it might be just the
discovery of a genuine newspaper-writer anxious to provide his journal with the earliest report of
a good 'story." Or it might be a lie invented by his father's enemies who desired to " bear " his
father's interests. Or it might be a lie spread abroad by his father himself. And he had explained
to her how it might be made to suit his father's turn to " bear" his own interests. She was not
lacking in intelligence sufficient to grasp the idea of such a manreuvre, if she had not an exact
knowledge, beforehand, of how it would be worked. She was shut off by the necessity of her life
with a father who was called "trying " by most people who knew him - a father whose death, if it
might have caused some satisfaction to a world that sent a certain class of learned books out for "
review," would certainly not have sent the prices of varied stocks tumbling down all over the
world.

For the mere rumour of her lover's father's death - the rumour thus unconfirmed, denied,
re-affirmed and re-denied with violent asseverations - had undoubtedly effected that. She knew
it from her CousinAugustus, who, a solicitor with a too-limited capital, had, upon the very
Monday night, dashed down from town to get from her, with cousinly force, some sort of what he
called " pointer." Things, he said, were "falling" all over the place: they went down in London
and they went down in Yokohama. As for

what things were doing in the continent that lies westward, between London and Yokohama, he
said the report of it beggared description. It had given to her belief in human nature one severe
shaking at least. Her Aunt Emmeline, a lady of fifty-two, dessicated and thin-lipped, who more
than any of the family had been able to indicate by dogged silence a disapproval of her
engagement to " an American" - though to be sure you could not possibly have told that this
particular American was anything but a very gentle and unassuming anybody else - her Aunt
Emmeline had come to her between tears and outraged indignation to assure her that if Eleanor's
lover's father were dead she would be literally beggared.

It put a new light upon the fact - she had discovered it whilst her aunt had been spending last
Christmas with them - that her aunt received by post a journal called the Investor's Guide. No
one had ever exactly known how her Aunt Emmeline's money had been invested: one associated
her so definitely with a family solicitor's advice: she took her needs to be so small that it was
incredible that she should have tried speculation - and speculation of the wildest sort.

It came, in fact, to this quiet girl of thirty or so as a revelation - as the shock of an earthquake
might have done. It revealed to her her aunt as possessed of a perfect abyss of cupidity - though
she could not in the least imagine what she would propose to do with money when she had it. It
had worried her, too - this revelation - because it seemed to show that



the influence of her lover's father had spread from the town with a queer name where he resided
even to the decorous and quite ordinary Red Hill, where her aunt's creeper-bedecked villa offered
a small white drive to the impeccable suburban street.

For her aunt had announced that since Eleanor's engagement she had decided to follow the
fortunes of the Charles Collar Kelleg companies: she had speculated in the shares1 of the
enterprises that - according to the Investor's Guide - C. Collar Kelleg sustained with his voice
from Kellegville, Ma. It was not enough for her to say to her aunt that her lover dissociated
himself from his father, his father's enterprises, and - as far as he decently could - from his
father's State. It did not even mitigate her aunt's wrath when Eleanor said that she herself, in the
course of her long intimacy with the son, had only four times heard him mention his father's
name. Her aunt had the crushing reply that if her fianaf had not been his father's son she would
never have let herself be drawn into speculating - on the cover systejn - in the Kelleg group of
companies.

That announcement had, in a sense, relieved the girl's mind. It meant that her aunt might be a
solitary speculator on this side of the water. For of late so considerably had the name of Collar
Kelleg figured in the world as that of an engineer of combines, a breaker of American railway
laws, or an amateur of the Fine Arts, that she had come to fear that each inhabitant of each
ivy-covered house that she called on in Canterbury, Kent, England, was concerned in the fate of
 - was certain to be ruined by - C. Collar Kelleg, of Kellegville, Ma., U.S.A. Only a fortnight
before she had taken her lover to a garden-party at one of the Canons' houses. And when she had
introduced him to the Canon himself, the Canon - a wearied-looking cleric with side whiskers
and a not too new coat, a clergyman reported to be in difficulties even with his butcher - the
Canon had said:

"Not really a relation of - of the Collar Kelleg?"

And when her lover had winced, when making the confession of a relationship that he always left
undefined, the Canon, exhibiting at once a latent eagerness and an ostentatious official
indifference, had asked:

"And is it true that he . . . that your uncle, is it? . . . meditates buying up ... acquiring an interest in
... all our railway lines between . . . Liverpool and the Metropolis?"

The young man had answered:

"Why: you cannot tell. I cannot. Of course there are so many things that he controls. He might
want to send them backwards and forwards between New York and London. And Liverpool's on
the way between, of course."

The Canon had choked in his throat at these words, to which he seemed to accord a huge gravity,
and she had been conscious that, in and out among the clumps of cedars on that sunny lawn, no
person ever spoke to the Canon that afternoon without hurrying away to another group of guests
with an announcement that caused heads to turn in their direction. It affected her to a pitch of
nervousness - so that for a moment or two she was relieved when her lover was disengaged by a
lady with a pink dress and a pleasant laugh. She stood alone by a clump of hydrangeas waiting
for him to rejoin her, and a voice behind her back uttered:

"Oh, I suppose he's come down to see if he won't  buy the cathedral."

And another:

"Oh, he couldn't  do that, could he? Doesn't  it belong to the State or something?"

She felt herself grow warm from her feet to the roots of her hair, and she hurried aimlessly away
as the first voice exclaimed:

"Yes. That's the point of my joke. Thank goodness here's one thing these fellows can't  . . ."

She hurried away - aimlessly. The Canon's garden had such high walls that it seemed to her,
precisely, that what she wanted to do was to sink into the ground. If only her lover had not been
Collar Kelleg! He had every other possible quality - stability, kindness, gentleness, the right
brown eyes, the right full voice, the right brown moustache, the right great height. It was only his
portentous identity that jarred on the perfection of the afternoon. For the grass was so green that
the tall cedars appeared dark blue: the garden was full of pleasant people: the high, brick walls
gave a comforting feeling of privacy; the tallest, square tower of the cathedral peered down upon
them, almost golden in the sunlight, benignly, like a great benediction from many tranquil ages. It
ought to have been such a perfect afternoon, that on which she introduced her lover to her people,
for if they were not - the Canon's guests - her own family, they were, very exactly, her clan;
some very rich, some decently poor, some very clerical, some decently scholarly, some with great
estates, some with great mortgages - but all, down to the red-haired archdeacon from a northern
diocese, all quiet, unobtrusive and presentable after you made allowances. And she, if she were
the handsomest girl there, was not very noticeably so. She would not have wanted more.

It was only her lover who stood out, by reason of a portentous name. And she found herself
explaining to several intimately sympathetic ladies that he was not really at all closely connected
to the Mr Collar Kelleg; that they were not in communication with one another; that her fiance
had not been in America for fifteen years; that he all but made his own living; that, in fact, you
could hardly call him American at all. And she tried to put it, as unobtrusively as possible, that, if
his means would run to it, they intended to settle down in one of the little, old, good houses near
the City and live as a nice young couple should. To the objection that her father would miss her a
great deal she went even so far as to hazard that they might settle down with him at the end of the
two years or so that their engagement would last. Only of course it was awkward that her fiancJ
needed a studio. Her father would not feel inclined to sacrifice a greenhouse or part of his garden
in which to build a shed with a north light.

It had not been through any lack of veracity that she had so painted the probable course of their
future. It had so presented itself to her: her lover, even, had so projected it. He too loved that
simple, tranquil, fine life: he loved, that is to say, the outward aspects of it: the broad, smooth
downs, the gently-aged houses, the dependable servants, the quiet, filled streets, the soft colours.
It was he even who suggested that they might share the house with her father. He could not
imagine a betterordered type of life. There was only London that was finer - and they could go
up to London as often as they pleased. The only obstacle was that her father had a blind prejudice
against Americans - against the American point of view: against the American scholarship:
against the very name. He went so far - he, the politest of men, who had put no obstacle but
muteness against her engagement - went so far as to say that he would discharge. his servants,
pack up his books and go back to Cambridge before ever an American should take up permanent
lodgings in his house. He had never met an American before he met her fiance; but he changed
none of his views when he did meet him.

Nevertheless, until that fatal Monday when the papers had suddenly - with special cables - 
announced the death of Charles Collar Kelleg, she had to herself, as to all her relations and
friends, mitigated her lover's Americanism, and she and he together had speculated upon which
of the many pleasing houses near the ancient valley city should eventually hold them and witness
their unobtrusive joys.



II

THE death of his father put all this in an entirely different light. She felt herself, vaguely, that his
inheritance of immense "interests " in the country across the water must render him infinitely
more American. You might mitigate the fact that he had been born in Idaho and had lived till he
was four in the town of Hut, Montana. The truth suggested itself at once that to be born in a
stable does not make a man even a groom. But to have been born there, and then, in addition, to
control the output of thirtyseven billion loaves of bread, three railway and eleven steamship lines
 - all these things together would make it impossible for him to pass as one of "ourselves." There
was, of course, the immense wealth, but that was a thing so invisible that it could not be called
any equivalent for the age, comfort and presentability of Cuddiford House - the small manor that
they had half decided to take. At the same time it rendered Cuddiford House impossible. You
could not live in it and be the wealthiest commoner in England! A week ago they had not been
certain that they could afford even Cuddiford! Now . . . Sitting on the edge of her chair in her
father's dining-room, where he had awaited her, she said almost faintly:

"Oh, it can't  be as bad as that?" He looked at her with his brows wrinkled.

"As bad as what? " he asked.

"As that you're the richest citizen in the world!"

His face cleared, and from the rich enhancing of his colour it might have been said that he
blushed with pleasure.

"You can't  tell how glad I am," he answered, "that you call it bad!" He hesitated, and then added:
"But I'm determined to end it. To end it or mend it. I've  been thinking of that - if you agreed, and
I was certain you would agree - all the way down from town."

He had brown hair that waved a very little; he had a straight nose; he was dressed in a very
perfect suit of brown, and you certainly could not have called him anything but a very perfectly
typical Englishman, if it had not been that, just at times, his brown, seal-like eyes were a very
little too intelligent. He was so tall that his motion across the room was a noticeable fact: he was
so good to look upon that to be towered over by him was a pleasure: and the fact that he only
held out to her both his hands to take both hers was so exactly the right resealing of their bond of
union that, as his large, firm fingers closed upon hers, she felt impelled to utter the words: "Oh, I
don't  like Americans!" in an intermezzo of pleasure and relief.

It was the little intimacy that she allowed herself - as another girl might whisper to her lover: "I
don't , as a rule, like Roman noses - but the rest of you makes up for yours!"

He had heard her say the same thing several times

before, so that he accepted the compliment with a fine, friendly smile and reverted to the first
question.

"It's the trick of my - my compatriots," he said, "to call everything they possibly can the largest
thing in the world. I suppose it's because they're - we're - idealists." He pressed her hands
gently. "All the same those are the words of my father's head agent in London - his very words.
And he happens to be an Englishman."

Whilst she walked erectly to the sofa his soft eyes followed her firm figure, dwelt with
admiration on the dark hair that rose in the curve of a Phrygian cap, and passed down to her
white, firm hands. His brown eyes were indeed full of love and of trustfulness, to which there
was added a certain gladness. He had doubted that she would see eye to eye with him, but there
had been forced from her, without any lead from him, the one word, "bad," that he needed. She
sat still and pliantly upon the edge of the long, red lounge. Its walnut back above the velvet
cushions was carved into tiny, smiling, cherub faces; above her head was a circular mirror that
reflected, with gracious distortions, in bows and curves, the long windows and the silver
candlesticks upon the table. It was exactly the place in which she should be; if she had not chosen
the furniture or the darkish, pleasant atmosphere of the not too old room, she had at least
inherited the right to fit into it. Sitting there, doing nothing, waiting for life to pass, she seemed
exactly to represent what he most delighted in. If she did not represent - if he did not feel for her
 - passion, she did represent a feeling of the Best. She held all the charm of a life so ordered that,
if you did not inquire too closely into whether its domestics had a share in ideals and comforts,
represented something as near a perfect, a heavenly, peace as you could find on this earth . . .

"Bad! " he repeated, as he moved to sit beside her. "It's so bad that it will mean an infinite
amount of worry for me - on the other side. I'm quite determined - and you will be, when you
know, if you ever do, what it's like - to put things straight." And he clasped his hands over one
knee that he crossed above the other.

She smiled a little.

"Yes. I suppose you'll have the power to put some things straight now," she said. He gazed at the
blue and red pile of the carpet and his eyes strayed, musingly, up the fluted, dark legs of the
dining-table.

"Heaven knows," he said, " it is not power that's given me. It's a burden; it's a duty."

She dropped one of her hands affectionately upon his fingers.

"Oh, well, old boy," she said, after a moment's thought, "it's not much good trying to redress the
burdens of our ancestry. I'm pretty certain I should not be sitting here if it were not for the crying
injustice one of the Grevilles made his money by centuries ago."

He clasped her hands with some of his long fingers.

"Oh," he said, "that's vague and indefinite and long ago and undecipherable. Besides, it was in
the spirit of the time of your ancestors."

She laughed at him still.

"Well, I suppose it would be pretty difficult to discover whom to give our money back to."

He turned to her a face so full of earnestness and force that she did not laugh any more. His
voice, if it was tender, came from deep in his chest.

"It's precisely because it is not difficult to discover whom my father robbed that I'm going to stop
the robbery," he said. "Why," he continued, "at this moment you're paying my father - you're
paying me - half as much again as you ought to for half the things you wear and half the things
you eat. It's worse for the poor people here: it's infinitely worse for the poor over there. They've 
paid taxes to him - they're paying them to me - at this moment - on light, on house rent, on
locomotion, on bread, on salt. There's hardly a thing that my father has not made the starving
starve worse for need of. Ice now is a necessity in the slums of New York - and you don't  know
what slums there are in New York." His voice got deeper: he was taking breath for a new
outburst. "What do you think my father and his associates have done for ice? They've  let the sun
into their blockhouses on the Lakes: they've  kept back all the ice-fleet a whole month: they've  ..."

"But is not that," she interrupted him with her slow, submissive and deep tones, "isn't  that in the
spirit of the time - over there? Just as much as the peculations of our ancestors, here, were in the
spirit of their time?"



He swept back a heavy lock of hair from his forehead.

"Good heavens, no!" he said. "Do you think that was what the Minute men died at Lexington for?
Do you think that's what humanity's come to? It is not in the spirit of the time. It's a throwback:
it's a survival. It is not - it is not. What America's there for, is to carry the thing one step further:
to do what Europe is too tired to do: Heaven help us: what's America for in the scheme of things
if it isn't  for that?"

She said, lightly and tenderly:

"I did not know you were as American as all that!"

He bent his head close to hers.

"It's just because I'm not American: it's just because I'm suspended between heaven and earth,
like Mahomet's coffin, that I see things so clearly. Consider: you've  struggled up here, in Europe,
to a certain stage of justice, of peace, of goodness of heart. It's taken you ages to do it. But you
are at a fine pitch. Over there they've  started from where you left off: they've  had the freedom
you've  had to fight for: they've  had the wealth that it's been always so difficult to wring from the
earth here. Don't  you see? Don't  you see? It is not in the spirit of their time: it is not in the spirit
of yours. He's an accident - a phenomenon such as my father and his fellows: it's due to the fact
that they have to handle such tremendous masses of things. But I, just because I'm not an
American, nor yet a European - I want, now I've  got the duty laid on me, to break up one of the
boulders that's in the way of their car. They need a fair chance: they need decent treatment from
Providence. It's too bad that, just because accident has placed the power in the hands of a few
throwbacks, a whole, fine, generous step in the progress of humanity should be hindered."

"You know you can talk," she said. "But I really believed that they were all the same over there - 
that it was in the spirit of the age to make trusts."

He came back from the state of mind in which he had allowed himself to voice a great many
pent-up thoughts - thoughts that he had repressed for years in order to come into line with his
undemonstrative environment.

"Yes," he laughed, " I have been treating you as if you were a public meeting. But whom am I to
talk to if I do not to you?"

"Oh, I quite like it," she said almost shyly. "I do like to hear you say you'll do things. And I don't 
doubt you're right."

"It isn't  a change in me," he answered. "I don't  change. It would have been foolish to talk of doing
things when there did not seem the ghost of a chance that I'd ever have any power. Now it's
different." He accepted the shy tone of her voice then. "Of course you'd like me to do things. I
daresay it's seemed a defect in me that I was mild and ineffectual. But you'll see a change!"

She smiled.

"I don't  mean to let you upset things here.

There's nothing that really wants changing. But out there - if you don't  go away from me to do it
 - it doesn't  seem to matter."

He shook his head and put the tip of her ring finger to his lips. When his eyes came back from
the carpet to her face he began again:

"Of course it's a mathematical absurdity," he laughed, "that all the eighty million inhabitants of
the United States should be engaged in founding Trusts. It's the infinitely few that do it."

"That's why it is not in touch with the spirit of the age? 'she asked.

"That's why," he nodded. "The huge - the infinite - mass of the people are good, decent,
hardworking, and awfully idealist. Think of their record! They want Liberty, they want it as they
want the air they breathe. And that's fine. It is. Why, it's a fine imagination - even if it's a
clumsilyexecuted lump - the figure of Liberty that you'll have to see for yourself before very
long. It is fine. Only it's always so tremendously in evidence that you forget it - just as you'd
forget the sun here if you ever saw enough of it to make you get used to it."

She mused.

"I suppose I shall have to go with you - out there - one day, for a time at least."

"Yes." He caught at her thoughts. "It will make an incredible change all this. But only for a time.
I shall get rid of it all. It won't  be very difficult - only, there will be arrangements to make - 
employees to settle. I've  an idea of co-operative factories - something large and fine. But of
course the ground will have to be studied. It will take time - you'll have to help me. And then,
when it's all fixed up, we shall come back here as if nothing had happened - and no doubt we
shall be able to afford Cuddiford House. I don't  imagine that all my father's money was made
nefariously."

She startled him by saying:

"I suppose your father is actually dead."

His mind was so distinctly more upon the future than upon even the immediate present that it
was a moment before he could bethink him to draw from a side pocket a long slip of bluish
paper.

"Here's the private cable," he said. "Mackinnon deciphered it."

And whilst, with her eyebrows raised, she ran her glance down the paper, he moved beside her so
that his head nearly touched her shoulder, and gave fragmentary explanations.

"Mackinnon," he said, "was my father's chief agent in London. He holds the secret cipher book.
The man who sent it - Maginnis - is an Irishman. He's - so they say - my father's dme damnte
 - as remarkable a man as my father. At the head of all the combination. So that he speaks with
the weight of about six hundred firms, there and here ..."

She interrupted him with: "Is this possible?"

"That my father controlled six hundred firms? Why," he said, "I don't  know that the figure's an
exactly round number, but . . ."

She interrupted him again, a little impatiently:

"Oh! - that's possible. But that your father should . . ." and she pointed her white, little finger at
the line of a paper.

"Oh! - that" he said, "that's entirely likely. You may take it for gospel truth."

"What a huge sum the cable must have cost!" she said as a side issue.

"You've  got to revise all your ideas," he answered. "The cable may have cost a hundred pounds.
But that's not even a drop in the bucket compared with what's always at stake. Why, this
combination handles - I don't  know - a million dollars a day! I don't  know. I don't  suppose they
know themselves - that anybody ever could know - because the circumstances of the businesses
are so vast and change so rapidly that everything might be something else before you could
possibly calculate where you stood at any given hour."

She dropped the consideration with:

"It makes one feel giddy."

And he with: "Yes, it's like trying to think what would become of you if you fell overboard in
midAtlantic. The depths are bottomless."

They returned to the consideration of the cable, when she said:

"But which are we to believe? That your father died because the medicine he took was not
properly made up, or because he was drugging himself to look ill for the sake of deceiving the
reporters?"

He removed the hand that held her disengaged fingers to touch his moustache, a gesture that
aided his reflections.

"You can believe either," he said. "Or



both. Or nothing. Or even something quite different."

Her dark eyes rested for a moment upon him, affectionately, seeking further explanation, and he
added:

"My father certainly suffered from angina pcctoris. He certainly took nitrate of amyl for it. And a
chemist over there is equally capable of giving him capsules without any nitrate of amyl in them.
No doubt, if the truth came to be known, the chemist's shop was owned by one of my father's
own combinations. In that case they'd certainly have had instructions to run the business as
economically as possible. And nitrate of amyl costs money. In that case, not even a man as rich
as my father could have got the stuff pure. No one could in the whole continent."

He considered again for a moment.

"But the whole thing with its ramifications is so infinite that it makes one tired. Why, it doesn't 
even begin to end there. The capsules my father took may really have been perfectly all right. He
may just have died. The whole story may be a lie. But his combination may be now intent on
forming a combine of drug stores. They may want to raise a storm of indignation against
druggists and then to buy up all the drug stores in America at cheap rates because of the
discredit."

"What a frightful people! " she said.

"Oh! " he answered, "don't  believe that they're frightful. The only wonderful thing is that we're
only just beginning to understand such manoeuvres. They've  been going on everywhere and
always. What's hopeful is that now we're beginning to understand the method we shall arrive at a
means of fighting it soon."

She did not answer that, but returned to her paper.

"But why should your father have wanted to make himself appear ill?"

"Oh," he answered, "that's simple. It's the only simple thing in the business - because, you see,
it's the only place in which a human figure stands alone and is visible. All the rest is combines
and numerals. This is a human dodge. It would be just like my father - who always was fond of a
joke."

He reflected again for a moment.

"You've  got to think that my father really was a striking man. My mother, of course, taught me to
dislike his - his methods so much that I've  shrunk from talking about him much, even to you."

"Yes," she answered, "I've  learnt a great deal more of him from the papers than I ever heard from
you."

He patted her hand deprecatingly.

"Well, don't  bear a grudge against me for that," he said. "I sort of hoped that I should never have
to talk to you about him. And the papers - Heaven knows! - always had enough in them about
him for you to learn all you could possibly want to know - for the purpose of marrying me."

"You mean," she said, " that you never expected to be him - as you are now."

He smiled a little wearily and then kissed her.

"Never," he answered, and then: "But of course I'm not the man my father was. All the same . . ."
and he straightened himself by pulling at the back seam of his coat, " I'm going to stand up
against him now. I'm going to fight the influence he's left on the world."

She considered this announcement for long enough to rejoin:

"It almost seems a pity!"

He returned to his parable.

"You see: my mother, for all she was only a lady's-maid when he married her, was as English as
you - or your friend the Canon's wife, or your father for that matter. She just hated his `American
methods` as much as ever your father could. I expect it was as much that as the `Thing,` whatever
it was, that my father had done that made her hate him so terribly."

She paused before she asked him:

"What was the thing your father did?"

He shook his head and answered:

"I don't  know. As I've  told you two or three times, there was something. But my mother never
told me. She had a sort of loyalty to my father after all. It may have been murder . . ."

"It hadn't  anything to do with another woman?" she asked.

"Oh, dear no," he answered, " my mother had too much knowledge of life to expect my father to
be faithful to her. No: it may have been murder - my mother would not have liked murder. But I
think it had to do with my father's having been disloyal to a friend. Once or twice before she died
she spoke of a man called Kratzenstein. I think my father stole a mine from him. Something like
that. My mother, you see, would not have been able to stand - she would not have been able to
understand - that sort of crime."

Eleanor commented: "Ah!"

"But my father," he continued, "my father, I imagine, would have considered it a good - or
sardonic - joke to rob a man who trusted him. Probably Kratzenstein was robbing someone else
already . . . you can't  tell."

She scratched her cheek reflectively.

"I think I understand your mother's standpoint," she said.

"Oh, my father's is absolutely simple," he answered. "What he wanted was fun. If he diddled
Kratzenstein it was for the pure fun of diddling. If he's made the largest fortune in the world it
was for the same reason. If he tried to make himself appear ill to the reporters, that was because it
was a lark. No doubt the lark's only huger if he actually killed himself over it. I wouldn't  mind
betting that if he's left his fortune to me it was because he saw it would be a tremendous bother to
me. He was not the type of man who'd want to found a dynasty. I guess he thought I was a terrific
prig."

"I think I'm rather glad he did," Eleanor answered.

He meditated upon the point as if he were not quite certain.

"I think my mother was glad of that too. You see, she hadn't  a sense of humour. I fancy my father
thought she was a prig too. He used to be amused at her - and at me. I suppose I haven't  any
sense of humour."

"I'm glad of that too," she said softly. She considered once more.

"I'm sometimes sorry, in a sneaking way," he said. "It makes me seem less of a man."

She said, with a little wounded intonation:

"Then you don't  care what I care!"

"Oh, for goodness' sake," he said, " don't  say that. If I did not care what you cared should I be
here consulting you?"

In a swift access of tenderness she put her cheek against his.

"You dear! " she said in soft tones of emotion. Then she drew back and looked into his eyes from
quite close. "At the same time I don't  see what we're consulting about."

He knelt down suddenly and kissed first one foot and then the other, that she held a little out as if
to a shoe-black, pulling her skirt a little back and peering over.

"We are not consulting about things," he said, from his knees, "we're getting to know each other
better and better. We're consulting about our points of view." As he knelt she put her hand upon
his head. "That's why we can't  keep to any straight line," he concluded.

"At the same time," she said, "we ought to talk about something. There seems to be such a
tremendous lot to do"



"Oh - to do" he said, with a touch of deprecation. "The only thing to do is for me to show you
how I worship you."

"That is very American, isn't  it?" she asked, as if she were inclined to take advantage of both
people's traits. He was to behave like a European and to be as devoted as the Transatlantic is
supposed to be. He rose, however, to his feet.

"Yes, I suppose we've  got to settle on some line of action," he said. "Where are we?" He took a
little pencil from his waistcoat pocket and ran it through the hair above his brows.

"I have not ascertained a single thing," she said. "Not one that's definite. Here's this telegram?
Who is it from? What does it really mean? What are you going to do?"

"I'll write that down," he said, and when he had taken from his pocket an old envelope he jotted
down upon his knee the three headings. "We need," he concluded, 'some sort of anchor to hold
us to the ground."

He took from her the copy of the deciphered cable and tapped it with the back of his pencil.

"Where does it come from? " he quoted. "New York. And from Patrick C. Maginnis. That's fairly
certain, because it was sent in a code that only Maginnis uses. My father, even, was not
acquainted with it. That was their safeguard. Maginnis, in the combine, represented the heads of
businesses who were not my father. That settles where it comes from." He wrinkled his brows.
"Now, as for what it means?" He reflected for a moment. "Let's read the cable word for word."
She nodded and he went on: "' John Collar Kelleg died on Sunday at 4.30 in the afternoon."
There's a definite statement. It may be a lie. My father may have got Maginnis to cable it for his
own purposes."

"What sort of purposes? " she asked.

"Well," he answered, "consider the rest of the cable." He cleared his throat and read further. "`It
is urgent that this news be authoritatively denied and re-affirmed in ail London papers until after
Monday, when associates of all the Kelleg interests will meet and determine on plan.' That may
be true: it may be a dodge." He read on again. "`Use all your influence with advertising staffs of
London journals to give the matter prominence`"

He drew in a deep breath.

"Now, there's a pretty straight proposition at last," he said.

She moved her hand across her dark eyebrows.

"I'm an owl, I suppose," she said, "for I don't  see it."

He patted her on the hand.

"I'd hate it if you did," he answered. "It's a blighting sort of knowledge that I wish I had not got to
have myself. But there it is!"

He tapped her knuckles with his pencil.

"It's like this," he explained. "What's wanted is to keep Kelleg shares in the public eye. They go
down when it's reported that Kelleg's dead; they go up when it's reported that he's alive. Well
now, someone makes something out of each of those ups and downs. But what's wanted is a
downward tendency - not too swift just now, because they're not ready."

"But why?" she asked. "Why a downward tendency? They'd lose, wouldn't  they?"

"You dear! " he answered.

After a moment he continued:

"Now, let's read the next sentence. `On Monday you will declare unofficially that J. C. K. died by
his own hand. Upon fall of shares in London markets you will purchase every purchasable cent's
worth.`"

"I am an owl," she said again. But, holding her head on one side, she touched suddenly her dark,
smooth hair at the back. "Why! " she ejaculated.

He uttered: "Yes: you see the key. `On Tuesday we shall declare the dividend of 17  per cent,
for
the year of the whole combine. You will realise, upon the rising market, at your own discretion.`"

"Oh! 'she said, and a certain light came into her dark eyes. He took it for anger, and tenderly
stroking her hand he whispered:

"Of course it's abominable to bring you into contact with these things . . ."

He looked round upon the comfortable, severe, darkened scholar's dining-room. He touched the
red velvet of the sofa: his artist's eyes were gladdened with the Grecian bust of Aphrodite upon
the black marble mantelpiece, by the large photographs of the Forum and by the shining clock
that stood, as if dubiously hidden, against the light, between the two tall windows. It was
symbolic - because Time, there, was not the important matter: the last thing you did was to look
at the clock. And it shocked him subconsciously that he should be bringing her into level with the
times. But after all, as he considered, if they were making acquaintance with that sort of thing
they were doing it in order to fight in the interests of this sort of thing.

"It is degrading . . ."he was beginning, but she interrupted him with animation and gratitude.

"It is very interesting," she said. "It is not exactly the thing for a lady to understand. But so many
women have to look out for themselves nowadays."

"Your Aunt Emmeline? " he suggested.

She nodded and added: "Let me see if I really understand it."

She referred again to the paper. "Your father's associates are not - are not simply interested in
the sales of what they manufacture, as one would expect of them. They're more interested in the
price of their own shares. Then they do not hold all their shares?"

"Heaven knows what they hold," he said. "Perhaps not three penn'orth at this moment."

"But if . . ." and she laid her hand on his as the luminous idea came to her, "if they can make a
fuss about your father they will call attention to the shares. And if they can put it about that your
father committed suicide, the people who hold the shares will think he did it because the - the
companies are ruined and he knew it." He nodded at her reasoning. "And these people will sell
their shares for very little money. And your father's associates, who know that a very big profit
has been made last year, will buy these shares for almost nothing?" He nodded again
enthusiastically. "So that, when your father's associates declare that dividend the shares will go
up to huge prices, and they will hold the shares, and they'll take nearly all the huge profits of the
dividend and then sell the shares again at a very high price . . ."

"You make me frightened," he laughed at her. "You've  a perfect genius for finance."

"So that " - she ignored his sarcasm - " they'll have made a large amount of money and done
nothing, and have just as many shares as before."

She was silent for a moment, taking in the vastness of the idea.

"So that's the sort of thing that goes on," she said.

"That sort of thing goes on, year in, year out. My father did nothing else all his life after he'd
made his first start."

"But the little speculators - they'll find out now," she said.

"The little speculators never find out," he answered. "It's done every year: it's been done every
year in full view of everybody and nobody ever grows wiser."

She reflected again for a moment, and then she said: "What's to become of Aunt Emmeline?"

"I shall have to lend her something to carry on with," he said.

She made a quick movement of repulsion.

"You can't ! She's a lady. I can't  have my relations sponging on you for money."



"My dear," he answered gravely, "that's the whole thing. She's a lady - but she's a fool. I shan't 
be lending to the lady but to the fool." He paused again for a moment. "It's inevitable. Don't  you
see? She has not been buying shares. If she had she could hold on to them till they rose. But she
has not. She's got nothing to hold on to. She'll have to go on dropping money into this well until
its water rises and comes back to her reach again."

"It's degrading," she answered.

He said, gravely still:

"Yes, everything's degrading - to a lady. But I daresay she didn't  understand." And, after a
moment, he added: "You said, a moment ago, that with so many women about who've  got to look
after themselves it's time women understood this sort of thing. It is."

"But if they understand - they're degraded," she said.

He caught her up with:

"That's the question of the whole theory of education. Does the degradation come with the
knowledge or with the action? It's like a cheap debating society's thesis. But if your aunt had
understood what she was up to she probably would not have been the fool she has been . . .

"You see, my dear," he added, "it's a question of a whole social side. This sort of thing . . ." and
he waved his hand abroad to the clock, the silver candlesticks, the bust on the mantelpiece and
the beautifully polished steel fireirons that stood in the high steel fender. "This sort of thing is
beautiful, but it's expensive. If women have to have this sort of thing, to lead -this splendid,
cloistral life, someone's got to provide the investments in Consols to do it on. It's a divine ideal:
it's you. But you represent all that your fathers have scraped together - or a pretty good share of
it . . ."

"I don't  see what you're getting at," she said.

"We're getting at the fact that you're the most beautiful thing the world's produced," he said.

"But the world's changing so fast," she said, with her little mouthing of pleasure.

"No, no," he said quickly. "An ideal does not change."

She kissed him for that, but while she kissed him she said:

"But I'm changing. I've  learnt an infinite amount this very afternoon."

With his arm round her fine waist he uttered his confession of faith:

"No: you haven't  changed. It cannot affect you. You're cast in too hard a mould." It was, literally,
the hardness of her clean drawn figure, her stays beneath his hand, that had suggested the idea to
him. She gave exactly that impression of perfection that could not be damaged. Her bust with its
fine rounding, her skirts with their fine, long lines, her clearly moulded cheeks with their fine,
dark colour, the clear outlines of her hair - all these things that he so much admired made him
eloquent to say: "It isn't  you that are in any danger. You'll always see the ugliness of what my
father stood for. It's your business to be a shining example; it's your business to teach the Aunt
Emmelines of this world what to avoid. You've  taught me so much . . ."

She denied, with a happy and credulous blush, that she had ever taught him anything.

"Not in words," he conceded. "But merely to look at you is enough!"

He moved away from her and leant back in the corner of the sofa, his hands clasped behind his
head. He looked at her. "That's enough," he said, "to teach me volumes and volumes!"

She made a little, obvious, pleased retort, and he continued speculatively:

"I'd be an absolute fool if I did not learn from being with you how to live the best sort of life. Just
as we should be fools if we could not learn from that Venus " - and he pointed to the Aphrodite
that, with vacant, dreaming eyes and clear-cut, vaguely smiling lips, confronted a whole vision
world from the black polished mantel - " a whole side of beauty in Art and life."

"All the same," she said, " I am corrupted. I'm perfectly itching to know more about your father - 
and what he did - and what you're going to do, and all the sort of thing that people like that do
do."

He unclasped his hands a little unwillingly and, leaning forward, used them to emphasise his
meanings.

"No, that is not corruption in you," he said. "It's the call of duty. If there were not men in the
world like my father, and if there were not affairs like my father's, people like you would be able
to live your beautiful cloistral lives without having to bother about American business methods.
Well, it's our affair - yours and mine - to drive that sort of thing out of the world."

With a sudden access of fury he slapped one fist into the palm of his other hand.

"And, by Jove," he said, "I've  got a chance to cripple one Trust, and I'm - going - to - do - it!"

The animation dropped from his voice, and he leaned once more in his corner of the large sofa.

"After that's done," he said, " we shall come back here and pick up - no, not the pieces but the
whole - of the life we intended to lead, and you'll forget everything of this, and I shall be able
again to do, as I'm desperately wanting to do now - just to look at you leading your beautiful life
as if nothing had ever happened to it."

"But does not everything that happens modify one's life for ever? " she asked.

"Only in novels," he said. "You've  got to look at it in a different way. There's one's life - and
there's the accidental life that goes on all round one. If you go to a garden-party it doesn't  affect
your life in this house: you go out for an hour and a half, that's all. If I'm painting a picture and I
find the canvas is not quite properly stretched I go down into the basement and borrow a hammer
from the caretaker of the studio. I come back and tap in the wedges of the stretcher behind the
canvas. But that does not modify the picture. It's an excursion. And our excursion to the new
world is just going

down into the basement to borrow a hammer." He c

paused to survey her unconvinced face. "Only, my love," he said, "I've  got the hammer. My
father's left it me. All I've  to do is tap the wedges!"

She took up again the cable that lay upon the sofa between them. She did not wish to continue
the arguments, either as to whether she remained uncorrupted or as to whether you can change
and not change. She said:

"You've  explained `Who it's from?` and a good deal of `What it really means?` but you have not
at all told me `What are you going to do?`"

He had a great deal of patience even in a contest of wills like this with her, but he pleaded for
grace at this.

"It'll bore you to hear it twice," he said. "I shall have to tell it all to your father. Let's wait till
then." It was her father's polite practice at halfpast six to enter the dining-room when his
daughter's suitor was there, and to address to him a certain number of remarks. If, on the other
hand, the young couple wished to be alone they retired to a room more private, and Mr Greville,
after peeping through the half-opened door, would, in his turn, retire once more to his study till
dinner-time. It was with reference to this established custom that she said:

"Shan't  we go to my sitting-room?"

But he answered:

"No: your father's got to be faced and enlightened and rendered hostile - and the sooner it's done
the better." And then, resuming his pleading: "Only, till then " - and his eyes sought the
decorous



clock - " we've  got ten minutes. Let's be desultory. We shall have to be businesslike enough.
You'll have it all and to spare. But till then let's just talk. You've  got to hear - and I can't  tell it
you often enough - that you're the most beautiful thing in the world."

She leant back now against her end of the long couch, and she had an air of complacent
resignation: he was so tall, so brown, so gentle and so fluent, that even eating muffins by a good
fire in November, after coming in from the rain, was not more pleasant than being told in his
endless digressions that he loved her.

"You see," he began his flow of words that was to last for ten minutes, "when you're at leisure
you taste life - and it's just because this life here is the fine flower of leisure that it's the most
perfect thing in the world. It's brought up to its highest pitch. Now you . . ."

Ill

IT was not only a forecast of his plans that the young man had to offer to Mr Greville, it was also
a detailed biography. Mr Greville was of an extreme height and meagreness: he wore always a
black frock coat - he had never explained why - he was clean shaven, and, because his beard
grew with extravagant thickness and speed, he shaved always twice a day - before breakfast and
before dinner, which he took at nine. The apparent keenness of his black eyes - though he was
actually extremely shortsighted - the forward tilt of his head and a habit of listening to every
speech with his lips parted and his head a little averted, gave to his whole bearing an air of deaf
obstinacy. He had had no history: a younger son of a huge family it gave one the idea that his
people must have been of a fabulous richness, that he had never done anything to add to his
patrimony: he had married a woman of no particular dowry, he had always eaten the best things
in the world, bought the best printed and the best bound books, and had the best servants. He
sought in life for an extreme accuracy of mind, and having, whilst at college, contracted a habit
of reviewing books for a magazine started in his day by the undergraduates, he had continued to
review books until that day - consecrating his labours to the service of a journal chiefly
distinguished for its staff of reviewers, who were unequalled in discovering minute errors in
works of encyclopaedic length. He discovered errors in books on every conceivable subject, and
because this sedentary occupation was unnatural to one of his physical robustness he had
cultivated the habit of standing at most times when other people sat down. Thus, he stood all
through such church services as he attended; it was his custom to take his breakfast standing, and
at dinner he remained upon his legs until he had finished his soup. It was, nevertheless,
characteristic of the society in which he lived that although he did everything that was possible
differently from everybody else, and although he differed in his views from almost every soul
that he met, no one seriously considered that he was at all extraordinary, and his opinions were
sought for with anxiety by the higher clergy of the diocese when they were troubled in matters of
ritual, or by the Conservative candidates of the county when they were preparing electioneering
speeches.

It was part of his routine of studied politeness to Kelleg that every time the young man dined
with them he should deem it his duty to pass exactly fifty minutes in the society of the young
couple. It was his habit on those occasions to ask the young man what story he was illustrating
for the magazines, and, having heard the plot, he would analyse the idea, state what stories it
resembled, and carry back the analogy to Grecian, Indian or prehistoric originals.

On this occasion, having shaken the young man's hand beside the sofa, he retreated to the other
side of the dining-table, and so far departed from precedent as to say that he trusted the young
man had received less disquieting reports as to the state of his father's health from across the
Atlantic. He then turned his face to one side and, resting his knuckles upon the table, prepared to
listen. His daughter's suitor replied by passing the cable across the table.

"It will save time, sir," he said, " if you read this. It will make, you will see, a great deal of
difference to everything."

Mr Greville, with a slightly distasteful expression, fumbled for his pince-nez. He disliked being
seen to wear glasses anywhere: he particularly disliked to have to put them on outside his study.
Nevertheless, holding the tortoiseshell rims a little over to one side, he read down the paper. His
first words were: "I trust you will present my condolences to any surviving relatives of your
father's."

The young man laughed friendlily. The dislike of his fiancee's father couldn't  inspire his
indefatigable optimism with the belief that they wouldn't  one day hit it off together. Besides, Mr
Greville's presence acted to such an extent as a tonic upon his mental faculties that he felt always
a pleasant hardening of his own backbone when they were together.

"My father hadn't  a relative in the world," he said. "He was bom in the workhouse at Rydale in
Yorkshire - not a quarter of a mile from where I've  heard you say you were born."

Mr Greville gazed straight in front of him.

"That explains his extraordinary name," he said. "I recollect that two of the guardians of the poor
in our parish in the year 1840 were called, the one Collar and the other Kelleg."

The young man laughed again.

"I guess," he said, " that most of the extraordinary American names have some such European
beginning. And most of the extraordinary American customs too!"

Mr Greville stored the remark in his memory that he might, at a later moment, demonstrate its
inaccuracy. Immediately he asked:

"And your own name? It is not an American perversion of John?"

"Oh, I'm called Don," the young man answered, "because my mother was lady's-maid in the
family of ' the something Don ' - an Irish family, you know. My mother had a great feeling of
gratitude to her employers. They treated her very kindly."

Mr Greville supplied the name of the Irish family in question and added a slight - and a slightly
favourable - " Hum!" It distinctly pleased him that Don's mother should, in spite of the fact that
she became an American, have retained so proper a sentiment of respect for the ancient European
family in whose service she had been.

The young Don was so fortified by this sign and so stimulated by his future father-in-law's
presence that he could come straight to the mark.

"If you don't  object," he said, " I'm going to tell you all about myself. It hasn't  seemed necessary
till now to trouble you, beyond assuring you, as I've  tried to do by the sight of me, that I'm a
decent sort



of citizen and properly devoted to Eleanor. Now it's different, and if you don't  mind I'll take up so
much of your time."

Mr Greville assented, as much by moving his clenched fist an inch or two further along the edge
of the tablecloth as by any other sign that he gave. Eleanor settled herself more comfortably in
the cushions at the end of the lounge. She was complacently aware that her lover was about to
utter an immense flow of words, and if she was afraid that he might, in the course of them,
irritate her father by inaccuracies in his generalisations, she knew her father well enough to
beware that this would not increase his personal dislike of her lover. He was so nice, so pleasant,
and so ingenuous, and he had made that much of a good impression on her father as to make him
take in the fact that, although Don's father had been born in a workhouse and his mother had been
a lady's-maid, you could not really call either of them Americans. Mr Greville had never listened
to her upon the subject. He had accepted, in grim silence, the fact that she had engaged herself to
" an American ": he had been marvellously polite to her lover because he owed that to the future
husband of his daughter. But he had not once brought himself to talk the matter over. She had
accepted this as she had accepted his obstinacy of drinking his soup standing. It was not a thing
you could argue about. In the same way she accepted her lover's decree that he was going to talk,
and she let her mind wander away upon the point of what sort of mourning she must wear for his
father whilst she

kept an attentive ear for any new fact that might appear in a biography that she had already heard
more than once. For decidedly she must wear some sort of mourning as soon as the fact of the
death should become officially known.

Don began his story with the succinct statement that he had been born exactly thirty-one years
before, to a day, in the then uncharted territory of Idaho. Mr Greville received this exact
statement with satisfaction, but the young man could not remain in a rigour of precision. He had
at once to introduce his impressions and his memories. Of his first three years he had not any
memories at all, but his mother had told him that they had borne hardships, and his father had
since told him that his mother had borne these hardships with a courage that was admirable in a
woman who had been brought up as she had.

"And indeed," Don hazarded the digression, " it's one of the wonderful things about America that
you'll find there literally multitudes of such women, putting up with a heat, squalor and hard
work that they would not stand here for the promise of any riches."

"I suppose you lived in waggons?" Mr Greville pursued his search for the definite.

Eleanor, for her part, had arrived at the conclusion that she approved of mourning for the
relatives of a girl's fiance. It was a formality: a definite and clear assertion of recognition. And
after next Monday there would not be any getting out of having the relationship with the late
Collar Kelleg forced upon them. She had been able to avoid the subject when fencing with her
less intimate friends before. Now Mr Kelleg, by the nature of his death, would create such a
splutter that they could not possibly avoid the notoriety. It would have to be faced . . .

"Oh, I don't  know that it ran even to a waggon," Don was answering her father. "I know my
people arrived after three years in the State of Montana. Copper was the actual attraction, I think
 - or it may have been gold . . ."

"No: copper was the cause of the growth of the State of Montana," Mr Greville said.

"I daresay," Don replied easily. "My father's energies have been so multifarious since then that
I'm certainly a little vague."

"You may take it that it was copper," Mr Greville repeated.

"No doubt!" Don replied, and Eleanor shivered a little. This indifference to fact was precisely the
thing to irritate her father: and indeed Mr Greville, standing sideways at the table, pursed his lips
and moved his hand upon the cloth. "Anyhow," Don continued, "my father's actual beginnings
were not in copper. He used to say that they lived for the first year upon the price for his vote - 
paid by both parties and for a vote he had not got, because he was not yet on the register."

"That must have been an exaggeration," Mr Greville said, "for it is given in evidence that the
highest average amount paid even for the votes at the Senatorial elections in Montana was
sixty-eight dollars per head of the population of the State. Now, if your father had received
sixty-eight dollars from each side the total amount would not have been more than twenty-seven
pounds - so that they could not have lived for a year on the proceeds."

"He might have received more than the average," Don answered blandly. "It would have been
like my father. Anyhow," he added, "I was only trying to give you an idea of the sort of thing that
went on round my cradle. But I guess, as you seem to know ten times as much about the State of
Montana's history as I do, I may as well drop that part of it."

He considered for a moment, whilst Mr Greville was saying that the facts connected with the
Montana elections had come under his notice because he had reviewed for the journal he aided
the report of the United States Government inquiry into the contest.

"And the facts," he said, "were sufficiently singular to remain in one's memory."

This conclusion gave the young man his opening.

"Yes," he said, "you take the total bribery as so much per head of the population. But you do not
take into account the fact that all the population did not receive bribes. . . . Oh, I know" - he was
quick to countersigns of protest in Mr Greville - "a pretty large proportion did. I'm not trying to
whitewash the State of Montana. The returns are there, certified by our Government. But " - and
he grew more earnest - " my father was not the man to lie much, even when he was boasting of a
 - a successful misdemeanour. No doubt my father was speaking figuratively when he said that
he lived for a whole year on the bribes. He meant he got a pretty good whack - above the
average, and a pretty good lot of what's to be accounted for by the citizens who would not be
bribed."

"Your father," Mr Greville said, "received 362 dollars from one side and 379 from the other."

"Father," Eleanor said, " how could you remember that?"

"It was the most notorious instance cited by the Commission in their report," her father answered.

"There you are!" Don closured the matter triumphantly. "I told you my father would be the most
notorious case. He always was."

The discussion at that point was so distinctly "up to " her father that Eleanor awaited his next
attack. But Mr Greville remained silent and she recognised that he was not fighting an
argumentative battle; he was trying to pin his young interlocutor down to definite statements.
Thus, so far, they both triumphed, and Eleanor was not certain to which to accord the more, or
the more affectionate applause.

"You say " - Don's pleasant organ took up the tale after he had had time to recover himself - "
that copper was the distinguishing characteristic of the State of Montana; my impression of it was
dust and petroleum. I do not in the least remember what the town of Hut, Ma., may have looked
like when I was four." But he did know that when, by any chance, he nowadays got on a country
road and an automobile passed, in the summer time, it made him feel four years old again. There
was dust everywhere and paraffin in most places. And perhaps that



was why - as he put it - he passed most of his earliest recollected years in the barber's shop. It
had linoleum sides decorated with the portraits of ladies, whom he remembered as supremely
beautiful, and portraits of gentlemen lathered up to the ears. And it had, above all, a heavenly
odour! The oil of the essences and perfumes must so have pervaded the hot air that the dust could
not there find entrance. He must have seen several thousand men shaved there - and half of them
had since been hung and half had cottages at Newport. He could not remember them - but he
could remember Miss Judie Cole, who was now Princess Abucatti. She had been the most
disagreeable and the dirtiest child of four he had ever known, and they had fought a desperate
battle in the barber's saloon, using the pots of massage cream and the essence bottles for missiles.
"I remember," he concluded, and he supposed that the remembrance was typical of the sort of
thing that impressed him, "a pot of cold cream was broken against a chair by us and we sprawled
in it - Judie Cole and I - and I clawed the blue bows out of her dirty yellow pigtails."

He paused to take breath and to light a cigarette.

"That," he said, "was the sort of infancy I had. Imagine the frail child amongst desperadoes and
swindlers - and Jews! I remember the German voice of the barber - I can't  remember his face or
his name or what his figure was - but his way of accenting `Ach! Der Goods!' I suppose they
tried to beat down his prices!"

He paused again.

"And positively the next thing I remember was - Bournemouth!" He looked round at Eleanor
and interjected: "I told you all this part on top of a 'bus. Do you remember? In Tottenham Court
Road? Yes," he continued to Mr Greville. "Not Bournemouth, Mass., nor Bournemouth, Fla., but
Bournemouth, Hants, Eng., and a preparatory school - for the sons of gentlemen."

He became speculative once more.

"It's odd how absurd coincidences - silly synchronisations - get into one's life. I relate my
biography to you in Canterbury, England, exactly thirty years later, on the very day of the year on
which I was born in a nameless spot in Idaho, U.S.A. And on the very day on which I broke the
pot of cold cream in the barber's shop my father struck oil, or copper, or whatever it was that he
did strike. I suppose that's why I can't  remember being strapped for wrecking the barber's.
Perhaps my father was too engrossed with his success to attend to me."

He reflected again.

"But no! " he said, "that's not accurate. My father would not have strapped me for wrecking a
barber's shop. He'd have given me shares in his mine instead. He'd have applauded the outbreak."
He once more reflected and then added eagerly: "Yes, that's it. I got to Bournemouth precisely
because my father did applaud that sort of thing."

Mr Greville turned his face interrogatively towards his prospective son-in-law.

"Don't  you understand? " the young man asked. "That was where my mother came in. And no
doubt that was why I loved my mother and never bothered about my father."

"You're awfully obscure, Don dear," Eleanor interjected. "You must remember that my father
hasn't  heard all this as often as I have."

"That's true! " Don said. "I want to be clear. The fact is that my mother was fond enough of me to
use the strap mighty often - and my father was fond enough of me to prevent her as often as he
could."

It was at this point that Mr Greville astonished them both by sitting down - a thing he had not
been known to do, save when he was " reading for review," for thirty years. He set both his hands
upon his thin knees, and with the two tails of his frock-coat dropping behind his shins, and his
face for the first time turned to Don, he uttered, with an accent of hollow attention:

"Let me understand. How did these facts conduce to your arriving at Bournemouth?"

As a matter of fact Don's involved unfolding of his biography so nearly affected him as a very
inferior but interesting book for review would have done; it gave him so much necessity for
thought that, as he always thought sitting, he now found it necessary to sit.

"But it's as plain as Domesday Book," Don said with exasperation. "My mother took me to
Bournemouth, England, so as to be able to clout me as much as she thought fit!"

Mr Greville ejaculated a deep-lunged " Ah! " which gave Don Kelleg a moment to find contrition
in.

"No, that's not a fair statement!" he uttered. "But there are too many aspects. It is difficult. The
coincidences come in again here." He passed his hand up his forehead. When he, as it were,
emerged, it was to state that his breaking loose in the barber's shop had so exactly synchronised
with his father's first fortune that it had precipitated the break between his parents. For, on the
one hand, his mother had direfully proclaimed that such a day of outrage must be ended with a
thrashing. His father had declared that such a day of good fortune would be celebrated by an
absolute amnesty. "He simply would not let her wallop me," Don concluded. "He'd suffered it no
doubt in silence before or argued against it. But that day he obstructed it actually."

Mr Greville nodded.

"And on that day particularly my mother felt

sore."

Mr Greville interjected the one word, "Why?" as if he knew the answer.

"Because " - Don Kelleg faltered a little - " I suppose because on that day he'd found immense
deposits - or whatever the word is - of copper on his mine."

"But your mother," Mr Greville continued without passion, "your mother must have been aware,
before that day, that your father had stolen the mine ..."

It was at this point that Eleanor leaned forward and exclaimed, "Father!" For it occurred to her,
though it missed Don's perception altogether, that her lover had told her that his father had stolen
a mine before her father had come into the room.

"The late Mr Kelleg had stolen the mine at least three months before the day on which he
discovered the great stores of copper that it contained. Your mother must therefore have been
aware of the theft!"

Don scratched his head.

"Upon my word," he said, " you're right! I don't  see how it works out." He halted, discomfited for
a minute, and then he jumped at it. "Why, it's plain enough," he said, " she could not stand the
two things. She might have stood his stealing a worthless mine, but she could not stand that the
mine should be valuable and that I - I should be corrupted as well. The two together were too
much for her."

Mr Greville moved his hands from his knees and folded his arms. His gesture reminded Eleanor
for some vague reason of the Duke of Wellington at Waterloo. It was as if he had really uttered,
whilst he closed up his telescope: "Order the whole line to advance!"

"My dear Don," he said, "that's what I've  been wanting to get at all along. You've  had a decent
upbringing."

He paused and looked at Eleanor.

"You'll do me the justice to say," he continued, "that I have not opposed your freedom of choice.
I have not, till now, sanctioned your engagement. Now ..."

With a swift rush Eleanor was already half way round the table.

"You inscrutable person! " she said, and by that



time she had her arm on his shoulder. "Why in the world should you do it now that you've 
discovered his father was a thief?"

"I've  known that all along," Mr Greville said, expressionlessly. Eleanor shrank back from him.

"You are incredibly mysterious!" she said. "Have you been using detectives? How did you know?
Don does not."

"Don certainly doesn't ," her suitor echoed her. "That's because," Mr Greville said, " Don hasn't  as
much desire to know about his antecedents as I have." He repeated, after Eleanor had kissed him:
"Don is not going to marry his own daughter. He's going to marry mine. He mayn't  want to know
the worst about himself: I do."

Don uttered: "By Jove! it's true." But Eleanor, putting her cheek against his as she leaned over his
stooped figure, pointed at her lover.

"You could see for yourself," she said, " that he's the dearest and best and gentlest person in the
world. Was not that enough?"

Mr Greville, who had an air of being politely discomforted by her embraces, lifted his head so
that his piercing glance appeared hotly to challenge the young man whilst his words corrected her
inexact superlatives.

"He appeared," he said to her, "to be excellent and gentle - and no doubt he was dear to you. But
that does not provide settlements for you or a good strain for future generations."

Eleanor left him, to sit down on the chaij- that faced his across the window space. With her hands
on her knees, imitating his attitude, she had the air of making, with him, a pair of wardens of a
gateway.

"Then let's have something definite from you I" she challenged him affectionately. "You don't 
mean - you don't  mean to say that you've  written about settlements to his father."

"I certainly wrote," Mr Greville said, " as soon as I'd had time to consider what it was my duty to
do - about a couple of months after you had told me of your engagement and when I'd had the
chance to satisfy myself that - that Don was not entirely unpresentable."

Eleanor said:

"I shall kiss you because you call him Don. It means that you are not going to be very horrid."

"It means that you do accept me," Don uttered joyfully.

"I wrote," Mr Greville said, when he once more emerged from his daughter's embrace, "to Mr
Charles Collar Kelleg and asked him what settlements he proposed to make upon the occasion of
his son's marriage with my daughter."

"How could you? " Eleanor said, but her reasonable nature, which was so like his, coming almost
immediately to her rescue, she added in the same breath: " But of course it is exactly what you
ought to have done."

"I understood," Mr Greville said, "that Don had from his mother an income of about two hundred
a year invested in English railways. He made about another two hundred a year by illustrating
stories in magazines. I told him that you had about as much as Don from your mother's estate.
And I gave him to understand that you might live comfortably and decently upon twelve hundred
a year as a certainty. I was ready to secure my daughter, after my death, another four hundred a
year if he was prepared to do the same for his son. I told him that large incomes are rather a curse
than the reverse in this country. Of course Don might go on making money by illustrations. But
he's not very persevering and magazines are precarious things to have to do with."

"What in the world," Eleanor asked Don, " would your father have thought at receiving such a
letter?"

"Oh, heavens," Don said, "there is not the least means of knowing. I guess he'll have liked it
though, if he wasn't  in one of his spread-eagling fits when everything English was hell to him."
He stuck his head on one side. "But no: I'm pretty certain he'd like any straight business
proposition."

"He answered in about twelve words upon his business paper, written by a typewriter," Mr
Greville continued.

"But what?-" Eleanor asked. Mr Greville erected his head to make an effort of memory.

"His exact words were: `Dear Sir: I shall leave my son all my enterprises. But I think he's got too
much conscience to make a good husband or anything else. He'll worry your daughter to death.`"

Eleanor let forth a long peal of laughter.

"Well, that's a prophecy!" Don said slowly. "My father was not so muddy witted."

"Oh, you think about yourself a great deal too much," Eleanor soothed him. "It's all rot!"

Mr Greville appeared to be reflecting absently and deeply.

"In return," he finally continued, "I wrote to Mr Kelleg that, considering the transient nature of
American fortunes, I should infinitely prefer him to settle a definite four hundred a year in
English Consols."

Eleanor interjected:

"Oh, I say!" Mr Greville faced her then: he had been looking at young Kelleg.

"I did not mean to say that he wasn't  to leave your fiancf his interests too," he said, " but I wanted
to secure something definite."

"I knew what you meant," his daughter said. "I wasn't  afraid you would not do your best for us. I
was thinking of Mr Kelleg's feelings."

"My dear child " - Don himself had a flash of inspiration - "your father's point of view was just
right. If my father was a reasonable man his feelings would not be hurt by your father's doing his
best for you. If he was not a reasonable man his feelings, in Mr Greville's eyes, would not matter
a cent."

Mr Greville moved his head rigidly up and down.

"I've  exactly hit it," Don appealed to him. "And of course my father would not mind. It's the sort
of thing he'd have to put up with every day over there. Distrust! Obviously no one ever trusted
him except when they had to. And he'd never trust anybody but the sort of person he'd think a
fool." He leant his head back against the sofa cushions with a little air of being deserted now that
Eleanor had gone over to her father's side of the room. "After all," he uttered, "the American
business spirit in the matter of trustfulness is exactly that of the English lawyer. You do not trust
anybody. You do not waste as much time over seals and tape  an English lawyer would not if it
were not the way he made his money , but you put a mighty deal of mistrust into a half sheet of
notepaper. And there's a deal of a million dollars concluded."

He was proceeding to speculate upon how this state of mind had arisen in the Transatlantic
continent when he suddenly pulled himself up with:

"But I was trying to tell you my past - and to find out what my future's likely to be!" He looked
appealingly at Mr Greville. "Do" he said, "tell us what my past has been. You do it so much
better than I. Let us hear something definite."

At this appeal Mr Greville did take the matter in hand. Having paused for precisely two minutes
by the solemn clock at his back he then had the subject as well arranged in his head as would
have been one of his reviews of a contemporary book. In the meanwhile Eleanor had had time to
think that Don really was too self-conscious. A man ought not to be so much aware of his own
mental attitudes. It was not exactly healthy. And she had a vague sense that she must work him
out of the habit and a vague sense that that employment would afford her in the future many
delightful opportunities for intimate self-revelations - for those splendid "You's" and



"I's " that are, after all, the very food and staple of all love-scenes.

"I had " - Mr Greville commenced his review of the situation - " two things to settle in my
mind: the first, whether this young man was materially fitted to support my daughter: the second,
whether he was altogether sane and of well-formed character. As to the first you have heard part
of what I did. I wrote to Mr Kelleg those two letters. One asked him what he intended to do for
his son; upon his replying that he intended to leave all his ' interests ' to Don, I replied that I
should prefer him to put at least a small portion of it immediately into Consols so that his son
should be certain of a sure income. Mr Kelleg's reply to that letter was in these words: `I don't  see
what my son has done for me. Why should I give him up part of my capital? He has not been son
enough for me to want to assure him peace of mind for ever in England.`"

At this point Don leaned eagerly forward. He was about to offer a long comment. But when Mr
Greville paused to let him speak, he seemed, to Eleanor's eyes, to check himself violently, and
her father, having waited for a sufficient interval, took up his own tale again.

He had replied to Mr Kelleg's second letter that he himself was not interested in his prospective
sonin-law's peace of mind, but he was in his daughter's. He proposed that Mr Kelleg should settle
upon Eleanor just the sum that he himself was prepared to settle at his death - about four
hundred pounds a year. Mr Kelleg had replied that that seemed a pretty square proposition, but he
did not see why he should be concerned for Mr Greville's daughter's peace of mind. If she wanted
his son she might take him with all his disadvantages.

"But he added in a postscript" - Mr Greville concluded this part of his review - " that he'd see
that Eleanor should be properly provided for, quite outside any fluctuations of his or his son's
fortunes. He said that, for fear the matter might slip his memory, he'd already put into proper
hands a sum of money - he did not say how much - for the benefit of Eleanor."

It was at this point that Eleanor made her protest.

"Don't  you think," she said to her father, " that you ought to have spoken to me before putting me
upon the market?"

"Don't  you think," Mr Greville asked, " that you ought to have spoken to me before falling in
love?"

"But I couldn't  help falling in love!"

"And I couldn't  help being interested in your future," her father echoed her. "I've  left you, as
you'll allow, a perfect liberty to dispose of your share of your personality. But there is my share
too."

His level and quite passionless tones indicated a so great depth of affection for his daughter that
Don was moved to exclaim: "Bravo!"

And this indication of a fact that he had been indulging in a style of psychology - a style that was
apparent even to Don, although, indeed, it was no more than a quite definite statement - this
indication brought Mr Greville very sharply back to the necessity for sticking to definite things.
He was quite convinced that, when it came to psychological analysis, he was better at it than his
young friend, but he was not for the moment in the least inclined to make even so much
concession to his young friend as to show a man of his own dignity indulging in anything at all so
trifling as psychological speculations.

"So that here " - he resumed his review - " we have two definite facts." Mr Collar Kelleg had
announced his intention of leaving all his " interests" to Don: he had made, too, a deliberate
statement that he had settled something - something probably handsome - upon Eleanor.  " I
don't  imagine the man was lying." Mr Greville put his reason for relying on Mr Kelleg's word.
"He'd probably not have an imagination that went beyond trying to surprise me with his
generosity." 

Upon the whole this relieved his doubts as to the pecuniary future of Eleanor and Don. There
remained the question of the young man's mental and moral fitness for partnership with his
daughter. And Mr Greville once more unfolded his arms and, placing his knuckles upon his
knees, surveyed the young man with direfully piercing eyes that, nevertheless, hardly saw the
American's face.

"Oh, don't  be very hard on Don," Eleanor said.

"My dear," Mr Greville said, "if I were going to be very hard on Don I should not be sitting here.
I trust I'm always polite."

"You're always frightfully just," Eleanor said. "No doubt that's true politeness."

"What has always alarmed me " - Mr Greville ignored her interruption - " what has always
made me uncomfortable in dealing with American . . . manifestations is the American's singular
want of system. And it has struck me - it struck me at the very first when I made Don's
acquaintance - that he had a remarkably developed moral sense. I've  noticed on several
occasions that he's been unreasonably kind . . ."

"He's much too kind," Eleanor said, and Mr Greville uttered the solitary word:

"Precisely!"

"And that means," he pursued triumphantly, "that he hasn't  any kind of system in his morality."
He turned definitely upon Don. "You can't  get through life like that!" he said seriously and with
an air of shaking his head ever so minutely.

"You mean," Don said, " that Eleanor will never know where to have me?"

"That's what your father means," Mr Greville answered, "when he says that you'll make Eleanor
unhappy. I think you will myself," he added. "Eleanor's my daughter - and I know you'd give me
the fidgets if I had much to do with you."

Don said: "Oh! " in a grievous tone.

"The only chance," Mr Greville pursued compassionately, "is that you may develope a backbone
under her hands. After all you aren't  American. Your father was not, neither was your mother.
Your father obviously had character enough. I've  studied his history carefully and I've  discovered
that ... Oh!" he turned upon Eleanor, "I haven't  been employing detectives to look up the career of
Mr Kelleg. But I have subscribed to a press-cutting agency. The American magazines are full of
biographies of Mr Kelleg, and portraits, and demands for his indictment or suggestions for
raising temples to him as the representative of the American frame of mind." He turned his sharp
features again upon the young man. "It is astonishing how equally they're divided in opinions.
I've  collected 642 cuttings relating to your father. Of these, 340 clamour for his indictment and
302 eulogise his calmness in `crises.`"

"Well I guess," Don said, " he hadn't  any nerves at all. I have heard him talking to my mother,
who was a formidable proposition."

"I'll get you," Mr Greville said, "to resume your own biography in a minute. In the meantime I'll
just put the dots upon some of your I's." He paused to recollect himself.

"You were born in Idaho. You did go to Hut. Montana. You did spend most of your time, very
possibly, in the shop of a German barber."

Don said: "Well, it's fine to be corroborated!"

"The barber's name was Kratzenstein," Mr Greville said. "And he was your father's most intimate
friend. And it was he that your father relieved of the Great Cevanza Mine."

Don leapt to his feet.

"By Jove," he said, "the very first thing I've  got to do is to make some sort of restoration to
Kratzenstein."

Mr Greville's face assumed a remote air of disfavour and even Eleanor said:

"But surely there are more urgent things."




"Only think of poor Kratzenstein!" Don said, "waiting for all these years."

"We shall never get anywhere at this rate," Mr Greville said, and he positively turned his head to
look at the clock. Don was instantly full of contrition.

"Oh, let me get on with my biography," he said. "I'll be ever so short." And he hurried out a great
many facts. When his mother had separated from his father she had taken him to Bournemouth.
That was because the children of her former master, the O'Something Don, had gone to a private
school at Bournemouth. She wanted her son to become a gentleman - like the young Something
Dons. He had done very well at the private school: he had had the time of his life too. When he
was fourteen his mother had made a last attempt to live again with her husband. His father had
come over from the States: they had travelled in a desultory way half over Europe, his mother
quarrelling with his father all the way. Don had had a private allowance of fifty dollars a week
and permission to buy anything that he wanted in Rome, Paris or Vienna. It seemed to him that
there had not been a single thing he wanted in Rome or Paris. In Vienna he had wanted to buy a
dancing gipsy to travel with them. But his mother had not allowed it. When they got back to New
York his father had begun to build his famous palace, No. 1912 Fifth Avenue. And whilst it was
in the building they had lived in a great hotel. They had had the whole of the first floor. That time
Don considered to have been the most miserable he had ever spent. He had had no one to play
with but the bell-boys and lift-attendants in the great, marble lounges. And the lift-boys had
always been too busy to play any decent game. In the middle they would be called away to whirl
up to the twentythird floor. He could not, he said, to that day see a lift going up in a hotel without
feeling miserable - so many of his games had been spoiled. At last his father had hired lift-boys
to do nothing but play with him. Then he had discovered that he did not like lift-boys.

And his father and mother had quarrelled incessantly. At least his mother had upbraided his
father all day long: his father had always seemed to sit still with a twinkling smile and to catch
his mother out in passionately-inaccurate statements.

"It was unbearable!" Don said. "At least I could not stand it. Our storey of the hotel was
furnished with no stuff that had not belonged to Marie Antoinette! And those continual rows
going on all the time!"

There had, at that time apparently, been another woman in the case - a Countess Canzano. Her
husband did work for his father. But he remembered the Countess - a kind, delightful woman
who could sit on the Marie Antoinette chairs and look comfortable and in place! He liked her
very much. . . . And finally his mother had become pettish with him too.

There had come a day when he simply could not stand it any longer.

"I could not: I could not!" he said, full of emotion. He had had but one idea, to get back to
Bournemouth. His mother would not come away. She had said that it was her duty to defend his
interests against the Countess. So he had run off. "There wasn't  any heroism in it," he said, " it
was simply running away from something intolerable to something that could not possibly be
worse." He had stowed himself away on board a cattle-liner - with one of the liftboys, who had
wanted to run away too and who had showed him how to do it.

"It was not a bad time that," Don said. "Some of the cattle hands belted us: some were quite
decent and showed us how to catch the birds that live in the holds on the steers' backs. Little
chaps with dabs of yellow on their heads, like fire." He added the inconsequential detail that he
still remembered the Minnehaha whenever he smelt a stable, and that he seemed to smell a stable
whenever he saw a golden-crested wren.

But he had arrived at Bournemouth: the proprietors of the private school there had taken him in
with a kindness that he had considered to be romantic - until, as years went on, he had argued
out the fact that they, too, must have known that he was the son of one of the richest men on
earth.

"There is not, I suppose, anything romantic in the world," Don commenced to speculate. "It is
odd. On the face of it my running away on a cattle-ship was romantic. Actually it was not. It was
just necessity . . ."

"Your mother eventually rejoined you in Bournemouth?" The sharp tones of Mr Greville cut into
his rather dreamy drawl.

Don drew himself together and, unwillingly enough, resumed his dutifully direct narration.

His mother had rejoined him at Bournemouth. She had given up the struggle with the Countess - 
she had, in fact, divorced her husband, but she had not done so very well out of it. Mr Kelleg had
had to make her an allowance, not absolutely princely. She had wanted to do things in the style of
an English lady because she wanted her son to have the upbringing of an English gentleman. She
had kept rather a good house - she knew how, because she had been a lady's-maid in rather a
good house - and she wanted him to be able to bring home his young friends from Harrow and
Oxford.

"I suppose it was not much good to try to make me exactly that sort," Don said. "I wanted to be
an artist - there were aesthetic chaps at New College in my day. She wanted me to go into
Parliament. She would, of course. I probably should have," he continued. "I should have been
some nice, friendly chap's nice, friendly private secretary at this moment, I daresay, if she'd
lived."

He sighed for a moment, regretting perhaps that he had not been forced into those disciplined and
ordered paths. For the father of Oxley, who had been his special chum at Harrow, was now
Postmaster-General, and who knows .... However, he had been set on being an artist. It was, after
all, the visual side of things that always appealed to him - or rather, he corrected himself, it was
the psychological, the poetic atmosphere suggested by anything that he saw.

"For instance," he said, pointing at Mr Greville, "when I look at you it almost invariably suggests
to my mind - " But he drew himself together suddenly and closed the digression with: "I wish
you'd let me make a study of your head. It's so tremendously characteristic!"

Mr Greville rigidified the muscles of his neck as if he hardly knew what to do with that
compliment, and Eleanor stroked his hand to give him patience.

"Yes," he said grimly, " I suppose that has always been your trouble - the fact that you cannot
stick to the point."

"It does seem as if I never shall settle what I'm going to do," Don uttered plaintively. "And yet,
Heaven knows, time presses. My boat - a boat - leaves on the 16th and that's only six days
from now."

"I shall finish my book to-night," Mr Greville said, as if he were announcing that his tailor would
be sending him home a suit, and whilst Eleanor, with a little gasp of compunction, was actually
saying:"

"Oh, how I've  neglected you lately! I thought you were months off the end of it! " he brought out
in the same monotonous tones:

"I don't  see why we can't  get our packing done in the five days that will leave us."



IV

IT was into the flurry of thought caused by this tremendous announcement that Mr Augustus
Greville's dark, small, delicately-made and querulous figure was suddenly introduced. Because
he disliked ceremony of any kind he greeted no one with more than a nod, although he had just
made the journey down from town, and had not seen either his uncle or Don Kelleg for quite a
number of months. He walked determinedly to the fireplace, turned smartly on his little polished
heels, and, his hands encumbered by his bowler hat, brown gloves and thin, silver-mounted cane,
said with an aggrieved air that no girls, nowadays, seemed to want to get married.

Mr Greville rose stiffly to his feet.

"I gather, Augustus," he uttered, and he carefully averted his face from the young man, "that
some of your female clients have proved insusceptible to your charms."

"Insusceptible!" Augustus met his formidable uncle with saturnine impatience. "I've  spent the
whole morning - the whole morning - in a Shoreditch County Court with two nice girls."

"Two nice, fair, well-brought-up girls!" he repeated, as though indeed the times were out of

joint.

"We'll finish that discussion in my study." Mr Greville addressed the gently fidgeting Don.
"Now, at once." And with his instinct for courtesy he threw over his shoulder to the ruffled
Augustus: "I do not see what more a rising young solicitor can want." And with his afterthought
of kindness he turned round to say to Eleanor, who, in her eagerness, had stretched forth her
hands to balance herself for rising from her chair:

"We shan't  settle upon anything you won't  like, my dear."

"Then I shall go too," Eleanor informed him pleadingly, as he laid his large, long, scholar's hand
upon Don's shoulder to conduct him from the room.

"The trouble was," Augustus Greville threw at the black tails of his uncle's frock coat, " that they
would not philander with me."

"Or with any other man," he added in a lower voice, for the door had closed, without noise, but
peremptorily.

Eleanor made swift reflections whilst her cousin caressed his drooping, silky moustache - he had
laid his hat, stick and gloves upon the dining-table. Its long, fine, black hair drooped downwards,
like a tuft of maidenhair fern, and, veiling his little mouth, it masked his expression, or added,
with its droop, to his air of gloom.

"He's thinking of going to America!" Eleanor uttered to herself. "But why?" For if Mr Greville
was thinking of a thing he was certain to have unanswerable reasons. The things that he did
appeared at times incredible. She could not, ten minutes before, more easily have imagined her
friend the Canon preaching a sermon against the ThirtyNine Articles. But now he was going to
do it! Then there must be excellent reasons. It might be merely the desire to see the Thing with
his own eyes. She remembered that he had once, for a week, gone to stay with a quite incredible
Lady Felix, during a shoot, where they played kiss-in-the-ring in the drawing-room at one at
night. He had wanted to see, then, with his own eyes, though it had appeared wildly unthinkable
before. Or he might merely want to guide Don Kelleg. Don certainly needed a guide. Or he might
merely want a change. You could not imagine a change more complete.

So she remained, lost between amazement at her father's action - between that and a perfect trust
in the sanity of his motives - whilst her cousin talked about the two girls in the Shoreditch
County Court. They were quite nice girls, he kept on in his aggrieved monotone: their people
were good people. But what did they do? Look after their homes; marry, or anything of the sort?
Not at all. They ran a Woman's Trade Union Federation in the interests of match-girls. There
were about twenty nice girls interested in that thing. That was what they were about in Shoreditch
 - a sweating employer had got a girl as apprentice on iniquitous terms. Well, he'd so arranged
the case that the Judge called for a pair of scissors and cut up the deed of apprenticeship. But was
that the sort of thing for nice girls to be employed on?

Eleanor came out of her reverie about the American voyage for a sufficient interval to keep the
conversation decently rolling. Did he, she asked negligently, talk to his clients, the Woman's
T.U.F., in that way?

He gave one of his sudden, surprisingly radiant and sweet smiles that she liked so much in him - 
a smile that made her think, half wistfully, that if the right woman had got hold of him his
petulant expression - what they called in the family the scowl that wouldn't  come off - would
never have appeared on his face at all. But poor Augustus had been so crushed in his youth by his
father, the intolerable Bishop, and so worried in his after youth by his mother, who still, after his
father's death, had kept, as it were, the great verbose spirit of his father as an immense wet
blanket for ever before his eyes, that now at thirty-three, whilst he was still a baby he was also a
perpetually mutinous old man. He had all the spirit and ideal of extreme youth together with the
old man's - and particularly the old clergyman's - habit of ineffectually bewailing the
disjointedness of his time.

And whilst, still smiling, he told her that it was not of course a solicitor's duty to express to his
clients his views of the Activity of Women and their "proper Fields," any more than it was his
duty to explain to his client, the R.C. Bishop of Chichester, what he thought of "Rome," because
it was his business to get a practice, and his business lay mostly with Federations and Societies
and the Trustees of Roman Catholic Dioceses, who, by-thebye, did want a deuce of a lot of
interest on their investments . . . whilst he was explaining to her, in fact, that he was
uncommonly fueilte and acute as a solicitor, she was wondering what he would have been like by
now if she had accepted him the first time he had proposed to her. He had, indeed, in his
negligent, gloomy and aggrieved manner, proposed to her since then innumerable times;
practically he had said, "Look here: why don't  you marry me?" every time they had met for the
last ten years. She had not ever been very certain of his seriousness: she had not much troubled
about it at all. Only from the fact that he had not, latterly, come near them at all, and from the
other fact that her Aunt Emmeline occasionally let drop some of her winged shafts against the
"inexplicable conceit of poor Eleanor," had she been able to gather that her refusals really
rankled. Aunt Emmeline, of course, had, when they were quite young, always kept a watchful eye
upon them: she did not, she said, approve of the marriage of cousins, and she had never, after
they were seventeen, allowed them to, say, skate alone together. But of course, in those days,
Augustus was the son of a real, live - and very roaring - Bishop: since then he had become the
son only of a remarkably extinct volcano, with a mother who, having rendered herself impossible
to all the inhabitants of their " Close," had come to living in a villa - if a very big villa - at
Reading, from whence it was poor Augustus's fate to run daily up to town like a blackbird let out
at regular intervals to the length of a very short piece of string. But though Aunt Emmeline might
really object to the



marriage of cousins it was pretty certain that she would object still more to the refusal, by a
cousin, of her son.

It would not much have surprised her if, at that moment, he had said once more: "Look here: why
don't  you marry me? " in his tones which were half masterful and half querulous. Instead his,
"Look here! " - for he did utter the words - was followed by:

"Is that man dead?"

And it brought her sharply back to the fact that she did not really know whether Mr Collar
Kelleg, in his distant and unrealisable city across the water - whether he were actually dead. It
was what you would call a moral certainty that he was. But she felt that she would never be
actually - as you might say, physically - certain unless she had actually touched his corpse. She
answered him, however, with:

"Have you been speculating?"

He answered quickly:

"God forbid! " as if the mere suspicion were one more insult.

"Then why," she asked him, "are you so frightfully anxious to know? You came all the way down
from town yesterday to ask: and you've  come again to-day."

He replied only:

"It is not at all the sort of thing that I should have to do with."

She quite realised that the minute shrug attending his words was as much as to say: "You've 
engaged yourself to this man. You cannot expect to have my confidences as you used to." For she
had followed the building up of his practice from the very youngest days, when he had been
employed by a great and respectable firm of conveyancers, to the day when, with a small but
reputable band of clients of his own, he had launched his own little boat. With each new client he
had, as it were, bidden her, imperiously, to rejoice - and, in a gentle way, she had rejoiced. He
had always " proposed " when he got a new client too.

She was not, however, going to accept his rebuff. It seemed ridiculous that he should want to
shut her out merely because she was going to marry Don - for it would not, that event, in the
least affect her accessibility to him. There never had been a time when she would not have burst
out laughing at the very idea of it. As she put it to herself: one would not marry Oggie any more
than one would marry one's brother or one's spaniel.

"Not at all the sort of thing," Augustus repeated, referring still to the idea that he should speculate
in the enterprises of Mr Charles Collar Kelleg.

"Oh, well, Oggie," she said, 'such extraordinary people do seem to have speculated ..."

She had in her mind her Aunt Emmeline, and he, who much dreaded that his mother - she kept a
flintily hard hand upon her own purse-strings - might be the person she had in mind, asked
swiftly:

"Whom d'you mean?"

Her own " No one in particular " - for it was not her business to give away her aunt - had all the
effect that she had intended - the effect of making him think that it was ridiculous that there
should be secrets between cousins. And she held out to him an olive branch by saying:

"Everyone I know seems to have been dabbling - I dare not go near Canon Dearmer's, for
instance."

He smiled at that confidence, and in a grateful return gave her his own - for it pained him to
keep a wall up against her if he could decently throw it down.

"They do it on both sides, then," he said.

"Ah, it's your clients you're concerned for!" She took his meaning. "The Very Reverend ones!"

He made a little gesture with his noticeably delicate, pale, dark hands.

"My friends," he said, "think that assuredly Providence will be on their side in the stock market.
They think - they really seem to think - that the saints or archangels will contrive to bull their
shares."

"I cannot imagine the poor dear Canon thinking anything but that his gambling is sin," Eleanor
retorted. "He's probably dreadfully ashamed of doing it."

"There's the difference," Augustus chimed in, "that your Canon does it to enrich himself. My
clients do it for the furtherance of their Faith." The communion with Eleanor, upon any terms,
thawed him swiftly, and the details of his predicament came out of him now in a rush. She
listened so well: she was so receptive and yet she was not, as he put it, any sort of a humbug. It
was not, however, what he got out of her, but the manner in which he got things out of himself,
that made him think that he never enjoyed anything so much in life as talking to Eleanor.

"It's like this," he said: "the late Mr - it does not matter about his name - left a certain sum
towards building a church and a mission in a place where there are a number of Irish factory
hands. This sum was left to the Bishop and trustees to hold in trust till sufficient money had been
raised by subscription to complete the whole thing." Augustus had been made the solicitor to this
Trust, mainly because, although he was the son of an Anglican Bishop - a Bishop particularly
hostile to the other persuasion - he had managed to help one of the other Bishop's trustees to
several very profitable investments. "They'd prefer," Augustus said, " a solicitor of their own
persuasion, but it's one of their maxims, you know, that the godly grow fat at the expense of the
unrighteous." And Sir George - the trustee in question - had persuaded the Monsignor to come
to Augustus for advice. The Monsignor - a foreign prelate - had revealed to Augustus a mind of
a wholly pleasing natvete. He had said to Augustus that there certainly existed in the world of
stocks and shares certain things that would increase any given sum of money tenfold without the
motion of a hand. It was true that the original money was sometimes lost; but with Providence on
one's side - and Providence was very good to them - the idea of loss might be negatived. He
wanted the Church and Mission money invested in one of these securities.

And Augustus had suggested that they should follow the fortunes of Charles Collar Kelleg. They
were the sort of thing, those papers, and he hoped to get some tips occasionally from Eleanor. He
did not say that he had never really believed that Don was as much estranged from his father as
he and Eleanor had pretended. "But now," he said, "Kellegs are falling as if the bottom had come
out of a bucket. And they're saying in the City that Kelleg committed suicide."

It came into Eleanor's head to wonder how in the world " in the City " they had already come to
say that. For the rumour was not to have been spread abroad by Kelleg's agent till the Monday.
Or it might have been the Saturday. She could not precisely remember the day mentioned in the
cable: but it was some days ahead still. She said:

"I don't  see how it'll affect your pocket. It's only the Catholics who will lose."

"My dear child," he said sententiously, "it will make all the difference in the world to my
pocket."

She wondered for a moment and then said:

"But surely a solicitor is not responsible for money a client loses."

He said darkly:

"That's it. You always remember that I'm a solicitor. You forget that I'm a gentleman too," and
she knew that his tone meant: "That's why you've  always refused to marry me."

"Oh dear," she said, "the trouble's always been that I forget you're a solicitor. You're much more
like a big baby when you get on the high horse."

He choked angrily for a moment, and then remembered that you could not expect from a member



of your family the aloof politeness that you ought to receive from the rest of the world.

"This is intimacy," he said bitterly.

"Oh, Oggie," she said quickly, "I wish you weren't  so sensitive. One always forgets that you
haven't  grown out of it."

"You always forget that I'm in love with you," he answered grimly.

It bobbed up so quickly that, to retain her selfpossession, she could not say anything better than:

"I've  never been in the least sure of it!" But she had mastered her desire to laugh - a discourtesy
that would have shocked her father's daughter - sufficiently to add: "And of course, in that case
the less I go out of my way to spare your feelings the better."

"For us both? " he asked saturninely.

"For you," she rejoined determinedly.

"Then perhaps you'll explain," he said, with a business-like disagreeableness, "why you say I'm
more like a baby than a solicitor."

She told him - to show him that she did not fear that he'd resent it enough to break with her - 
that he could not in the least withstand his infantile tempers. He could be shrewd enough whilst
he kept collected. Take this case in point: there was not the least moral call upon him to
guarantee the Bishop from loss. On his own showing the Monsignor had wanted a gamble - 
well, Augustus had given him a gamble for his money. But at the suggestion that he should let
the church and mission suffer, Augustus got on his high horse and said he was a gentleman!

"Well, I am," Augustus said. "It was a moral duty in me to advise the Bishop against chucking his
money away. I let him do it. If I cannot discover whether this chap's dead - if I cannot discover it
in time and he is dead - I shall consider myself as in honour bound to pay the money back out of
my own pocket."

"My dear Oggie," she said sharply, "I doubt whether you're a gentleman at all. I really do."

And at his gasp of outraged astonishment she went on:

"It's romantic, what you propose to do. And a gentleman is never romantic. It isn't  fair to others.
It's not fair even to the Bishop. He needs a lesson, and if you stand between him and his lesson
you're doing him no end of harm." She felt that she spoke with the robust commonsense of her
Tory father: she knew that she was perfectly right and speaking like a man, not a woman. "It's a
gentleman's business - it's a decent man's business - to be normal. You've  got to play the game
and do what's expected of you; anything else is not fair."

She wished that Don had ever given her occasion to advise him, as she could always advise
Augustus. But Don's problems were always too nebulous for her: he was not a person who gave
way to passion: he was always, on the contrary, giving way to scruples.

"I wonder," Augustus sneered, "that you do not ask me why I should `throw away my money.`
Upon my word, at times you speak just like a desiccated solicitor yourself."

"Well, I hope I've  got some commonsense." She answered his gibe composedly.

"Oh, you've  got a little, for a woman," he said, "but you haven't  a grain of imagination - any
more than any other solicitor."

He smiled deviously and continued:

"I'm not such a fool as you think," he said. "I've  got it in my head to play the game of getting
together a large practice. And I shan't  do it if, like one of your sort of dry practitioner, I cut my
client's losses - especially if he's the first client of a large and unbusiness-like class."

He looked at her with a little perky air of triumph at the close of this speech. For his little "game"
was simply this: that if he indemnified his Bishop against loss when all the world, very markedly,
was losing its all, he would, in the little, reverberating, gossiping hill of that communion in
England, attract to himself the faith - and the custom - of half a dozen, a dozen, a score - nay,
of every Bishop in England. "For they're all the same," he concluded, "desperately greedy - or
desperately in need of funds if you like."

He opened his lips again to shoot at her:

"So I'm not the fool you take me for and, in the language of your bridegroom, it's up to you. I
score one."

"Oh," she said amiably, "if it's a question of cadging for business it's all the way up to me. I
thought it was a question of a gentleman."

A sudden gloom had descended upon him though he had not listened to her retort. He raised his
head suddenly to bring out, with a good deal of passion:

"Look here, Ellie, do the decent thing. Give me a pointer. I've  insured at Lloyd's against the
chances of the Bishop's loss. But it'll cripple me to keep up the premiums. I can't  do it at the pace.
You can take my word for it that I won't  use the knowledge to make any movements in the
market. But just save me personally."

The deeply-pleading note of his voice, his dark, searching eyes, his graceful, small presence that
seemed to move into sympathy with his words - his whole atmosphere and her remembrances of
which he made so large and innocent a part, moved her deeply.

"I can't  do it, Oggie," she said - and she remembered when she had run to help him land a huge
conger, on Deal pier, on a wet, blowy day twenty years ago.

"If I lose the Bishop and the chances of what he'll bring me," he pleaded on, " I may as well shut
up shop."

"Ask Don himself," she said in a low voice, and her eyes wandered to the table. The private cable
that she and Don had read together an hour before lay creased and blurred where her father had
left it after perusing it.

"That sentimental ass! " he said negligently, and resumed his deeper tone with:

"Look here, Ellie." He stumbled and halted and then went on. "It's not the money. It's the - the - 
my theory - my idea of how a practice is to be made. I've  had to back my own ideas - I haven't 
gone on in the old humdrum way. I've  told no end of the old, conveyancing, horn-spectacled
dodgers that they're fools. If I have to shut up shop mother will keep me: I shan't  starve. . . . But .
. ." and a minute shudder of violence went all over his dark being, "those other beggars will laugh
at me, I won't  stand it. By God, I won't  stand it ..."

His eyes went to the paper, towards which her hand was already reaching out. From where he
stood he could read, positively, the first words: "Mr Charles Collar Kelleg . . ." and with a deep,
sudden passion his hand raced hers for it. She sank back in her chair nervelessly and without it.
His sigh was almost like a sob and he held it close to his eyes, with a cat-like fierceness, for he
had inherited the shortness of sight of her father's family. His head in a minute came up from his
reading, his eyes sought her face, dilated and wide-lidded.

"By heaven!" he said. "What a scheme! I can make a hundred thousand if I'm cautious."

She said, as if now she sought guidance from him - as if, in her grief, she were asking him how
far a man - who must in the end know more of what a gentleman could do - how far a man
could go - just the one word:

"Oggie!"

He answered a non-comprehending:

"Well? " and then slowly he folded the piece of paper into a little strip.

"Yes," he said slowly, " of course it comes to that.



If you do not feel inclined to give me the pointer I haven't  read this precious message."

She said, with pauses between each word:

"I only half understand. What do you mean?"

"I mean," he said, with a deep bitterness, " that if you don't  care enough to tell me - knowing that
I shall be ruined - if you don't  care enough to say that you'd have told me in any case, I don't  care
enough about life to use the knowledge the paper has given me."

"You mean that you're too decent a man," she said. "Say that that's what you mean."

"I don't  mean anything of the sort," he said pitilessly. "Your American's fair game, papers and all.
If a man's fool enough to leave such a paper on a table he's . . ." He stopped and said: "I mean
literally that if you do not care for me - at least enough to save me from ruin - I don't  care
enough about life to keep my end up."

"You're asking me, in fact, for permission to use your knowledge," she uttered.

"Look here," he said, and she knew that the moment for his stereotyped form of words had come,
"why don't  you marry me?" He went on swiftly: "I can make enough with this to keep us for ever
and ever. You can make what you like out of me. You know it. You cannot make a man out of
that - that sponge. You can't  marry him. You can't . He's like the tamest sort of cat. He's an
incredible ass. . . . Why, the other day I was walking up Buckingham Street with him and a loafer
came and offered him a box of matches - one of those wastrels that ought to be hanged: one of
the curses of the day. And what did your Don say to him? - ' No, I thank you! '" Augustus
spurted out the words with a bitter contempt. "He's polite: he's sweet, like that, to the very pests,
the cancers of Society. You cannot marry such a man. Not you! You!"

"Why don't  you marry me? " he repeated, "why - don't  - you - marry - me?"

It was whilst the words were vibrating in the air that Don came smiling into the room. He had, in
her eyes, an air of blind greatness, a vast, credulous benevolence that made him approach
Augustus with his hand stretched out and the words:

"Who's going to marry you?"

He had heard only the last two words.

And it was the feeling that he ought to be warned that there were traitors in the world that she
brought out the words:

"Augustus has been reading the cable."

But all the stress died out of the room with Don's next words.

"Well, that's famous, I was just going to tell him myself," and Eleanor, with all her sense of sane
equity, could not bring herself to explain to him, at least at that moment, precisely how
overbearing and outside all bounds her cousin had been. Perhaps it relieved her to escape the
necessity; at anyrate, next moment it was too late. For Don's succeeding words were:

"It works out at this: we're all going to New York, and Aunt Emmeline is to be of the company!"

And into the gasp that seemed to come to both of them he threw:

"Your father is of opinion " - he addressed himself to Eleanor - " that you need a chaperon. I
tried to persuade him that those institutions aren't  modern necessities. But he puts it that if you
became ill - which he considers the likeliest thing in the world considering what American
cooking is - it would be the most awkward thing in the world to have no other woman in the
party." He waived, characteristically, their desire to know more facts by diverging into: "It's
astonishing how your father can, in a commonsense way, prove that a convention is a
convenience. Personally I'm all for kicking conventions overboard. But there it is: there's no
doubt that in American hotels - for you cannot, he says, very decently quarter yourselves in any
of my half-dozen palaces - the only decent servants are the negro bell-boys, who are not,
obviously, adapted for waiting upon a sick lady. Which shows you, once more," he was
continuing, "how the New World does redress . . ."

"But what's going to be done?" Eleanor asked, and for a moment she wished that her lover might
at times dispense with his tremendous flow of words. "You forget that whilst you've  been settling
it with dad we've  been sitting here."

Don's eloquent bronzed face expressed a sudden contrition and concern.

"It all seems so simple, now that your father's arranged it," he said, "that I've  sort of got the
impression it's so obviously the one thing to do - so obviously, that of course you'd know it for
yourselves!"

"I'm to go with you?" she asked. "Next Wednesday?" And whilst her mind quickly ran to
preparations, he was answering:

"Oh, it's principally you that go. But there'll also be I and your father, and Augustus here as my
chaperon, and your Aunt Emmeline as yours, and your father's man to valet Augustus and him,
and your aunt's maid for her and you. Supposing of course that there's accommodation on the
boat."

He added reflectively:

"Though, as the boats all practically belong to me, there doesn't  seem to be much difficulty. For
your father says - I don't  know how he knows it - that my father always kept a sort of prior
claim for himself on a suite of state-rooms for every boat of his lines ..."

"It'll cost a tremendous lot of money," Eleanor said.

"Oh, money! " Don said vaguely. "It doesn't  exist any more. There's nothing left for me but
action."

And whilst she was wondering whether she could altogether like a state of things, a physical
condition, in which, as it were, the force of gravity was left out and you just floated, he said
himself:

"It's a most extraordinary feeling! It's as if you could fly and did not want to," so that Eleanor had
a quick feeling of delight at their thoughts being so much in unison, as if, by mental telepathy,
she had sent him that very image . . .

Augustus said:

"But surely Uncle Greville isn't  going to let you pay for himself and Eleanor. Or has he too ..."

For he could not think of his uncle as affected by such a cataclysm, though he felt its effects upon
his own self. He knew, in his bones, that he too was going to fly - but his uncle was such a
determined pedestrian.

"Oh," Don answered, "at the rate your uncle can come to resolutions we've  had time to settle that
too. He pays for Eleanor and himself and your mother and the servants. He'll do it because, with
Eleanor so well `settled,` from that point of view he can afford to sacrifice his economies of
some
years to his desire to see for himself what the place is like . . ."

Augustus said: "Ah!" His uncle certainly was a pedestrian. He disliked motor-cars: he would not
bicycle: he did not keep a trap: he would not even sit down save when it was necessary - so you
certainly could not think of him as flying with another man's wings in the face of the Tory
proprieties.

"I guess," Don was going on, " that he would not approve of letting the fact that Eleanor was to
be well settled help him to make an excursion if it wasn't  that he thought I needed someone to
give me backbone. What he takes from me in the one obligation he'll restore several hundredfold
by saving me from making, as he thinks, an irrevocable ass of myself. I do not mean that he
wants to keep me from making reparations . . ."

"Don dear," Eleanor interrupted him, "did dad say that you were to take Augustus?"



The fact that the conversation had, under Augustus's auspices, taken a monetary turn, shocked
her sense of the proprieties - though she herself had provoked it. Money, in her scale of things,
was a thing you did not talk about. You might say: "It would be too expensive!" But, once you
had received the opinion that it would not, you did not, in well-arranged circles, proceed to
discuss the shares of the expenditure. That settled itself because the people engaged were decent
people; and she was so touched with coldness at Augustus's contribution to the discussion-1 - he
ought to have known her father would do the right thing! - that she was anxious even to indicate
to Don that Augustus was not the person to take with them, though she saw what a tremendously
" good thing " it would be for him if Don took him up. . . . She could not, moreover, conceive of
her father as recommending his nephew as a solicitor or as a travelling companion for himself.
Don, however, could not conceive of anybody else.

"Oh! " he answered her question. "Your father said that I must take a lawyer with me - not that
the law of the United States is the same as ours - yours - but simply because I needed a trained
intelligence. . . . No, he did not tell me to take Augustus: he told me to take my solicitor. And " - 
he put his hand upon Augustus's shoulder, a gesture that Eleanor felt to be wholly "American " - 
" Augustus is my solicitor."

Augustus was his solicitor: he had written, for Don, two solicitor's letters to two magazines
owned by the same gentleman. The two magazines had calmly appropriated two landscape
illustrations that Don had exhibited at a Black and White exhibition. Don would not have
worried about it if it had not been that the things had been so vilely reproduced. The proprietor of
the magazines had replied that the

mere advertisement of appearing in the P and the

W ought to be payment enough for a person like

Don. But Augustus's threat that his client would apply for an order to suppress the issues of the
magazines had brought tumbling in two cheques for fifteen pounds - which Don really had not
known what to do with - and a commission for further illustrations from the proprietor, who, if
he did not like to be bested, conceived a tremendous respect for an artist who would care to stand
up to him. A success so considerable - it was all the more considerable in Don's eyes in that the
proprietor had given an assurance that all Don's subsequent work should be reproduced just
exactly as Don desired - had filled poor Don with an immense respect for Augustus's powers. It
wasn't  everybody who could make a magazine proprietor careful as to reproductions.

This would not, perhaps, have mattered to Don so much if Don had not been a lonely soul and if
Augustus had not been Eleanor's cousin. One might even go so far as to say that Don had
invented the occasion of the lawyer's letters - he would not normally have bothered even about
the bad reproduction - especially that he might come in contact with Eleanor's relation. He
wanted relations: he wanted, with all his affections, a family feeling. And if it was not that, in the
least, that had made him fall in love with Eleanor - he had met her as a solitary figure when she
had been living in lodgings in Paris

to attend the L School of Design, so that she did

not seem to have any relations at all - it was part of an added charm to find that she had so
splendid and so typical - so comfortable - an atmosphere of belonging to a family. He had not
himself, since his mother was dead and he had quarrelled with his father, the ghost of a person to
feel affectionate towards: but on .Eleanor's side he discovered he would be able to sink, as it
were, luxuriously and warmly, into all sorts of connectionships. It did not matter that, as he
gradually discovered, Eleanor had not very much opportunity to see the members of her father's
and mother's family. She did not, indeed, seem ever very much inclined to make at all strenuous
efforts to keep up these connections. She need not, as he put it, because she had such a
tremendous wealth of them that as she had never known the lack - the feeling of being alone in
the world - she could not be blamed for not feeling how precious the possession was. But there
they were, hundreds and hundreds of aunts and cousins and uncles: and blood is thicker than
water. He felt himself at last about to slip into place somewhere on the edge of a ring. He would
not any more be without some sort of circle.

He would, in fact, have called Augustus "his solicitor " even if he had been the veriest of muffs.
He had so much need of something that was " his" that he would have proclaimed Augustus one
of the most remarkable practitioners in England though Augustus had had nothing but a lack of
opportunity. As it was it was splendid, because Augustus was solicitor to the Woman's T.U.F.
and to the Diocese

of ;and he had so efficiently conducted Don's

own affairs. So that, with his general excitement, with the feeling that he had that it was
necessary to act - then and there, under the very nose of Mr Greville, and actually under the eyes
of Eleanor, Don irrevocably engaged Augustus to be his man of affairs.



PART II
BETWEEN SHORES

THE waves beneath their eyes swayed out from the vessel's side; the sea was dark and metallic,
like slate with white furrings. It was astonishing because the sky was an unbroken pale blue, and
in the swept arch of the heavens the sun, hidden somewhere by the smoke stacks, had a sway
unhindered by any cloud. It affected the girl hostilely, this hard surface, in spite of the pure white
paint of the boat, in spite of the fresh feel of the air on her face, in spite of the bouillon in
handleless cups, the neat dresses that filled all the nooks of the pleasant decks, in spite of the
accent that made you laugh, because, faint as it mostly was, it was, undoubtedly, as allpervading
as the faint smell of tar that exhaled from every cranny of the immense boat.

The first bugle was sounded for dinner: the two blessed little intervals of their day had
commenced; for though you never observed any noticeable change in their attire, and though they
could not possibly have been any cleaner than they always were, they, all of them, except a pallid
lady who was said to be "very ill," disappeared into their cabins to do, in half an hour, what
Eleanor - it was, she was aware, inconsiderate to the stewards - contrived 



with deft swiftness to get done in five minutes after the second bugle "had gone." Don apparently
did not "do" anything at all, for he was always discreetly in his chair opposite hers by the time
that, swaying just a little to what was undoubtedly the inconsiderate motion of such an hotel, she
made her way between the filled chairs.

But Don, apparently, never had any need to " do" anything. He was always astonishingly neat: in
England, she remembered, he had always stood out, in this way, from all the other men she had
known. Here, among what she could not help calling to herself his compatriots - though his
mother had actually made him naturalise himself - he did not stand out at all. It was something
that, there in the shadow of a slung boat in the sea air, puzzled her a little. It puzzled her even
while Don talked, as he always was talking, in pleasant undertones, about things that she never
very well remembered. Or rather, yes, when she brought her mind back to it, he was talking about
what it would feel like to drown just where they were. The night before they had desultorily made
out in the great gilt-bound volume of charts that was in the great gilt-and-white lady's
drawing-room, that the sea there was 1400 fathoms deep - or 16,000 feet, or 1842 feet - or some
number that did not convey anything to her, and at that moment Don was vaguely speculating as
to how it would differ being drowned in that depth of water from being drowned in a pond. It
must, he was of opinion, make an enormous psychological difference, to sink and sink. Whereas
she simply felt that if you drowned, you drowned, though she admitted the pleasantness of his
allegories . . .

But what really occupied her mind was the riddle of his odd identity with all these other young
men here. For here, somehow, he did not stand out - as Augustus certainly did. There were here
perhaps seventy young Americans out of the 400 of their centre of the ship - seventy young men,
all gentle, low-voiced, extremely well washed - you would not somehow call it well-groomed - 
and with uncreased coats rather long in the back. It was not that the coats were not made in
Regent Street - they all were. But they had, precisely, an uncreased look; you could not tell why.
It was not that they were extravagantly new; it was rather as if they had been built - built was
precisely the word - for people who would never put them to any physical uses out of doors.
And yet it was not that the young men never went out of doors or never indulged in violent
exercise; for ten of those young men were returning - a college team - from competing with a
Cambridge band of athletes; and two others, at least, had, as war correspondents, done quite
astonishing things with rough-riders in some war. Nevertheless, Augustus, who could not tell one
end of an oar from the other, who had never been on a horse, who hated cricket, never walked a
yard if he could help it, and regarded footballers as "muddied oafs" who infinitely contributed to
our national decay - Augustus gave the idea that he could punch all their heads by sheer force of
passion. Don did not; yet Don had, she knew, pulled a very creditable oar in his college eight
and, tucked away somewhere amongst his other accomplishments, had the gift of shooting out all
the pips of a five of spades at twenty feet with an army revolver - and Don stood over six foot in
his stockings. Yet you never noticed him, unless you were in love with him, when, after breakfast
and before dinner, he joined in the frenzied swift rush round the promenade deck.

The problem, not the fact, worried her a great deal: for, approaching as she did those new shores
with a singular curiosity, she was anxious to discover what were the differences. She was not
inclined to believe - at first she had not been - that she was going to trouble her head in the least
about the differences. There were not, she had been ready to advance, any differences. The
people would prove just Englishmen who rushed a little faster perhaps but who wanted much the
same things.

But, in spite of herself, she was, she was aware, wondering all the time what made her feel
different from anything she had ever felt before. She realised, of course, that she was, really,
trying to make discoveries about her lover: she tried to think that he was not an American. But
she felt, in spite of herself, that he certainly was what those people called an unAmerican
American. - He was voyaging, indeed, under the pseudonym of "Greville" and passed vaguely for
her father's nephew. It was not Don that was in question. But the lady who sat at her elbow at
meals - a dark person with an odd variety of German accent who spent all her summers in
"Yurup " - had told her that another American, who passed most of his years in Liverpool, was
unAmerican. It was, apparently, undemocratic, if it was not absolutely unpatriotic, to have any
ties at all with any of the several old countries that they all, now they were hastening towards
Sandy Hook, affected contentedly to despise.

Don, therefore, was undemocratic and unAmerican. She felt, in her loyalty to him, that she would
not have minded if he had been both. And yet he fitted in so well with all the others. And she felt
so differently among them. She had been but two days on board and she tried to assure herself
that it was the unfamiliarity of her surroundings - the private sitting-room with the
vast-blossomed flowers, the yellow velvet with gold-work on it, the green marble wash-hand
basin in her berth with its silver fittings, or the nickel handles of all kinds and shapes that her
Aunt Emmeline in the next berth was perpetually straining her wrists to manipulate for
improbable purposes. Her Aunt Emmeline had days of fads when she would not allow herself to
be "waited on." Or it might have been the fact of eating with 400 other people at once that made
her feel strange . . .

But though she tried to assure herself that it was this, she was aware that it was not. What at
bottom was strange was to be among 400 people and not to attract from any man any of the
unsanctioned attention - ceillades or mere droppings of the eyes - that anywhere else would
have made her comfortably uncomfortable. Augustus, of course, was always eyeing her, but that
did not count, and she had, as it were, a definite prospect of a sort of loneliness that stretched out
before her eyes. It was a loneliness, for somehow the women. . . . They were not. . . . They were .
. .

She could not somehow size it up. When they came into the dining-room in crowds they looked
all right: but when you took them in detail. . . . Perhaps it was only the voices, the accent. And
yet it was not the accent - one had allowed for that. It was rather a sort of intonation - a faint
something - a querulousness! That was it. They seemed all, always, to be complaining, not so
much in words as in the tones of their voices. It reminded her - with a quite startling vividness - 
of ladies at home who could not get servants "to stay." They did not interest her somehow: not
any one of them made her feel the possibility that she would ever come to a thrill of intimacy.
They had not the complexions: they certainly had not the voices: they had not the look in the
eyes. They could not ever be her rivals!

It was that, to her astonishing discovery - for it came to her in a flash - that made her for many
days drop entirely the habit of speculating as to her companions, and they sank for her to the
almost permanent condition of moderately well-dressed automata. She did not care how they
dressed: for the way they dressed would not certainly interest any man who could interest her:
she did not care to hear about their friends, for they certainly would not be her friends; she did
not care to hear their views of Europe and its cathedrals. It did not bother her to have to listen:
they simply did not excite her



curiosity - not any one of them. And by this second of the very long days she had resigned
herself, for all of the time that she could not have Don to herself, to a future of lying in the deck
chairs and passing remarks about the weather, or the bouillon, or about who was ill ...

It was from a reverie upon one of these subjects that Don aroused her, whilst they leant, before
dinner, over the rail together, by offering her two cents for her thoughts. He dropped immediately
into the digression that she'd have to get used to considering - over there - that though two cents
was in value the equal of one penny, actually the Americans called a cent "a penny," just as a
good many of them called a quarter "a shilling " - so that she'd have to get used to considering
that a shilling consisted of twenty-five pence. She answered that she did not suppose that she'd
ever get used to anything of the sort. And why should she? She'd have him and her father, not to
mention Augustus and Aunt Emmeline, to look after her. She did not suppose she'd ever have to
come into contact with " It."

He had a little touch of disappointment in his voice - of a deeper disappointment than she cared
to have given him - as he said:

"Oh, I hope you'll take some of the problems seriously when you come to see."

"But is not," she said, "what we're going for, just to give you an opportunity to get rid of your
father's affairs and to pay a good deal of money away to some poor people and then . . .?"

Their attention was mutually distracted by the silvery, wedge-like form of a dolphin that, reduced
by the height they were up to the apparent size of a mackerel, dived, in a swift curve, in the hurry
of waters just below their noses . . .

"And then ..." She took up her sentence again. "Then? Why, nothing. We go back and it will be
all over."

With his hands upon the rail, swaying with the sway of the vessel, he considered this proposition
for longer than he'd ever considered before any proposition of hers - for a space of time that
appeared unnatural to her, considering how short were the precious minutes that were really
theirs before the next bugle would blow.

"Isn't  that it? " she asked at last that he might waste no more.

"That's it," he said at last. "But what you've  got to consider is that to do the thing - 
conscientiously! - will be a thing that'll call for an immense study. It won't  be - I don't  want it to
be if I can help it - and, if you approve . . ." His voice had in it an almost appealing note. "It
won't  be just selling a business - as you might sell a shop in the Marylebone High Street. We are
not, in fact - you and I and your father and Augustus - going out to see how I may retire from
business. We're going out as reformers."

"Dearest boy," she said, and a note of deep tenderness in her tone answered his pleading, " I'm
not going to hinder you."

"I know, I know," he said gratefully. "But the whole point is - the point that worries me is that
you'll have to take an interest - you'll have at least to study the circumstances. You can't  go in
and out as we did this morning when we paid a visit to the emigrants' quarters. I've  got to plunge
right into this eighty millions of people as I might plunge into this water here. . . ." He waved his
hands downwards. "Right down, to the very bottom almost. And if you do come with me,
Heaven knows when we shall get out again."

This was, as Don would have called it, a proposition that, in turn, made Eleanor pause for a space
during which they might have been carried a mile towards the invisible coasts. She met it
seriously enough with:

"I'm ready to do anything that's really necessary." She was not, however, even in her most loyal
moods, a person to encourage him in exacting boundless promises. "Wouldn't  it be enough," she
asked, " if you just shook the whole thing off? Is it really necessary to accept the responsibility?"

He did not pause at all with his answer.

"I told you at the very first that it wasn't  a power given to me. It's a duty. I've  got to do my best
with these people ..." He stopped to make the confession. "Coming into contact with so many of
them has made me tremendously in earnest. I hear so many old phrases: I've  got to face, at every
word that I overhear, something that represents an old hope, an old inspiration. I've  got to do
something."

"You were not, you know," she said, 'so exceedingly in earnest the Wednesday before last."

He rubbed his hand up his brow.

"Perhaps I was not," he said slowly. "But it does come back to me - the national feeling. I do not
know where it comes from. Perhaps from the days when I played with the bell-boys in the hall of
the hotel. I do not know where else. But . . ." He paused, and a look of positive appalment in his
face overwhelmed her.

"My dear thing!" he brought out, "I've  been dreadfully unfair to you. If you did not expect. . . . It's
shameful," he said; "of course you could not expect that I'd drag you into such an affair."

To calm him she put her hand upon his where it rested on the rail, as she was in the habit of
doing for her father in church when the sermon irritated him beyond bearing. But the contact did
not calm Don. He looked up at the canvas screen of the bridge where, silhouetted against the pale
sky, a man, bearded and blonde, with a gilt line round his cap, was holding at the moment a glass
to his eye. His own, mechanically, followed its direction.

"There's a ship!" he uttered, and then: "Of course I can't  turn the boat round - or I might perhaps,
only it would be hard on the passengers. But the very minute we get to New York, if you wish it
..."

"Dear! " she said, "don't  you understand?"

He brought out, almost hysterically, it was so swift, a " Yes, but ..."

"When I accepted you as my responsibility," she said, with an attempt at a smile to calm him, " I
took you with all your responsibilities. I shan't  funk the slums of New York when I come to
them. Only ..."

"Heavens," he interrupted, "it need not come to that!"

"Only" - she was determined to finish her speech - "I do not want you to assume more
responsibilities than you've  got to do for your peace of mind."

"My peace of mind is irrevocably bound up with yours and your comfort," he said. And she
accepted the obvious sincerity of his speech in lieu of the kiss that she felt she had deserved.

"And mine's so entirely bound up in yours," she said, " that if I thought there was a single thing
you felt you really ought to do, and if you did not do it for my sake, I should be irrevocably
miserable."

The shrill notes of the second bugle made him move backwards from the rail.

"Only," she repeated, as they squeezed close together to enter the companion door at the stern
end of the deck, " I do want you to make up your mind what will satisfy you."

"And you'll stand the racket? " he asked, supporting himself above her with a hand on the
panelling as the slow pitch of the creaking vessel elevated him right above her coiled hair. "You
are a brick." And she looked back and up at him with an ingenuous pleasure upon her fresh
cheeks, so that they remained at gaze until, in revenge, the dropping sternwards of the ship made
the stairway almost horizontal and brought her face up to his level. He did not kiss her even then
because he was lost in the consideration of whether he ought to accept the sacrifice.



This problem occupied him during the greater part of dinner, inordinate though - the second
dinner of the voyage being one upon which the resources of the kitchen were strained to show
what, as against the competing lines, the ship could do - inordinate though the dinner proved in
length to be. The problem of whether he ought really to take her with him any further
accompanied him through the indifferent soup, the excellent oysters, the hors d'ceuvres; it spoilt
his appreciation of the mousse of Westphalian ham; it made him so inattentive to the needs of
Aunt Emmeline that it was positively Augustus who had to reach across the table to fill her glass
with Apollinaris. It cast such a blight, this problem, upon him that he would almost gladly have
taken refuge in the belief that it was the motion of the vessel affecting his spirits. But he was too
excellent a sailor, and in spite of his dejection his appetite was too good to let him have that
solace. And almost he came to the conclusion, since the matter so much affected him, that that
alone was proof that he ought not to bring Eleanor into contact, however willing, with his
Responsibility.

He contrived to be dragged out of his brooding by hearing the lady at his elbow exclaim, in tones
too triumphant for the most preoccupied to miss:

"Now, there's a great man."

The remark was addressed to Mr Greville, who raised his thin, aquiline face and piercing eyes
immediately opposite to her across the table. And Don, in spite of his preoccupation, was
subconsciously aware that the subject of her eulogy was his own father.

Mr Greville's politeness, asking as if for information of an extreme ignorance, came across to
her.

"In what significance do you use the word `great`?"

"Consider," the lady cried out - she had massive, striking red hair and a massive and very
striking pale face of a mealy whiteness - " all the money he's made."

Mr Greville uttered: "Ah!"

"And consider," she went on, "his charities."

"Now what proportion," Mr Greville asked, "do you consider that his charities bear to his
income?"

"Ah," the lady said, "I know you're sneering at us. But tell me how many members of your
corrupt aristocracy have founded a university?"

Aunt Emmeline leaned across Don to almost groan:

"Ah, too true!"

She had found herself in singular accord with the red-haired lady. She had not ever anywhere met
people who so intimately agreed with her views of life as she discovered most of the people on
board did. She leaned, however, still further across Don, so that the aigrette in her hair
discommoded him, to remark that Mrs Sargent was not to take it for granted that all their upper
classes were unmindful of their responsibilities; though too few, altogether, recognised what - 
for instance in their relations to the Church - their duties were; and Mr Greville in turn begged
Mrs Sargent to realise that he was not sneering at her. He was travelling for the sole purpose of
informing his mind.

"So that you're really coming for pleasure?" And the lady, in her agreeable surprise, pulled still
further back the glove that dangled from her white and very plump forearm. "Now that is real
nice. You're coming to see us as we really are? So few British do."

Aunt Emmeline said that it was indeed lamentable that the better class of her island had so little
curiosity: it was one of the symptoms, it was probably one of the causes, of British national
decay.

"But don't  you think," Mr Greville asked Mrs Sargent, "that if we do not come it's because we
believe - we're probably very mistaken - that there's nothing to see?"

"You do not believe anything of the sort," Mrs Sargent cried triumphantly. "Go down to the
Battery any afternoon and you won't  be able to move for the crowds of British rubber-necks with
Baedekers looking at the sky-scrapers and the historic monuments. You don't  find them like that
at the Tower of London!"

Her triumph - and the incomprehensible word that you had to wait to work out its meaning - 
caused a momentary silence, into which Augustus was able to introduce the virulent statement:

"So that you get us both ways!" And to Mrs Sargent's puzzled expression he vouchsafed the
contemptuous explanation that she had said, first, that we were such fools that we never came at
all; and secondly, that the sights of New York did attract us so much that we abandoned our own
to an extent that impeded the native-born American . . .

Mr Greville turned his head towards his nephew for sufficiently long to say, over the head of
Eleanor, who sat between them:

"We did not come here to convict people of inaccuracies. We came to hear their views."

And Mrs Sargent rolled bread triumphantly between her white fingers and thumbs of both hands,
accepting Mr Greville's championing and reflecting upon an effective retort. It came after a
decent interval:

"I guess we Americans get you - both ways - all the time!" And Mr Greville gallantly but
enigmatically bowed his head. Mrs Sargent said brightly then she guessed they were the very
nicest party of English she'd ever come across - and she herself had been born in County Cork,
so she might claim to know both sides of the water and speak with authority. Augustus, she said,
would learn better before he was three months older: he'd find American women very bright, and
she reflected with satisfaction upon her retort, repeating, to lose none of its effect, that Americans
did get them both ways all the time. She hoped she'd be able to take them round Springfield,
Illinois, and show them something of the prettiest town in the world . . .

Don from this, to him, rather painful scene - in his amphibious existence he had heard so much
of this Yankee-baiting - retired, a little strengthened, to the consideration of the problem of
whether he ought to take Eleanor any further into these depths. It occupied him so fully, the
problem, that of the rest of the conversation he only caught Mrs Sargent informing the silent
Eleanor that she'd find American gurrls vurry bright, and that English women did not know how
to put their clothes on, a remark to which Eleanor only smiled a little deafly and bowed with an
odd likeness to her father. And he caught Eleanor replying in trenchant undertones to a whisper
from Augustus:

"Why, there are ridiculous people everywhere." If he'd been near her chair last night, instead of
being in his berth sea-sick, he'd have heard a drunken English country gentleman holding forth to
a lot of perfectly silent Yankees about the incorruptibility of English J.P.s and the perfection of
the British system. She'd asked herself just the very words that Augustus had just asked her.
"Was it possible that people really talked like that?" For, as against Mrs Sargent's "corrupt
aristocracy" the Englishman had alleged that you could get a verdict from the United States
Supreme Court - as all the world knew - by bribing any one of the judges.

"You do not believe people talk such rot till you hear it," she finished trenchantly. "But they do.
And it would be cruel of dad to draw that poor woman out if he had not got a good reason for it."

The unfortunate Augustus opened his moustachehidden mouth to retort, but a slow movement
that seemed to take the whole place, band, galleries, ferns on the table, and waiters, in one
gigantic hand and wave it through the air, made him at first appear to



reflect wildly and then to close his mouth. In spite of the fact that he was assured of  10,000 a
year for the next five years and sat next to his cousin, so that he could speak to her in undertones,
he was not yet having anything like what Mrs Sargent assured him was to be the time of his life.

It was probably the contact with Mrs Sargent that tipped Don's wavering scale upwards. For he
had to face the eternal problem of how much a king owes to his people, how much to his wife: of
how much the same king is pledged by promises that he has given before he comes to the throne
in face of the sufferings of his tributaries that he discovers after his accession. For he could not
disguise from himself the fact that he had pledged himself to let Eleanor lead the orderly,
sheltered, almost august life that had seemed to be all that the future promised them.

It was a definite promise that he had made, and, to his scrupulosity, you cannot be relieved from
a promise however willing the other party may be. At the same time he could not be certain that
he was not bound by a former promise, contracted not by him, but, as it were, by his ancestors - 
a promise of which Mrs Sargent was, in her vulgar ignorance, a dismal symptom. For
undoubtedly his father - and the men of his father's kidney who had preceded him - were
responsible for that poor woman. It was they who were responsible for her candid utterance that
Greatness was the power to trick coins out of the breeches pockets of the poor or that having you
both ways was the ideal of life. His father distinctly was the great prototype of extraction just as
his whole life had been a matter of having everybody not both ways, but in every possible way.

And it seemed to him that it was a duty he had brought with him into the world to re-act against
his father. He had, as far as he could, to show that poor woman with the red hair, pasty face, and
untidy, flabby, blue cotton shirt waist - who told his Eleanor that she did not know how to put
her clothes on and held up to Mr Greville a swindler like his own father as a type of what a
corrupt aristocracy should emulate - it was his duty to show that poor woman and the millions
that she represented, the millions that his father had taxed, swindled and presented with false
ideals, to show them that Greatness was something greater than the habit of accumulation. And
perhaps because of the optimistic sensation induced by the immense dinner, by the time the
sparkling wine, provided by the Company, and the nickel-silver souvenir pocket-books in which
you were to keep a diary of the run  provided also by the Company , had been arrived at, he had
momentarily squared the circle of his thoughts. It was the old solution.

For was not he going to the United States to strike a deathblow at what his father represented?
Was he not going to cripple all his father's enterprises? Was not he going to - as far as he could
 - set up a different standard? And would not that standard be the standard of Eleanor?

II

THE sun that night went down leaving a pink-and golden splendour that put new heart into Mrs
Sargent. There lay Mrs Greville, with Eleanor by her side, green and brown rugs wrapped almost
up to their noses, their feet rendered glorious by the light from the low sky, which gave to all
outlines a soft, luminous enhancing. A never-ceasing procession, silhouetted against the light - 
of lean men's figures, stout women, children whose little pigtails cut diagonally the lines of the
cordage - passed before their faces, the notes of a harmonium, the clashing of pail-handles to
simulate cymbals, laughs and endless, monotonous songs from the emigrants, invisible below
their feet, went up to mingle in the brilliant heavens with the rush of the water. It seemed, the
darkness down there, to enshroud and to accentuate the jaunty indifference, the squalor, the
ferocity or the mere listless, Eastern dejection with which, through the day, the fore-part of the
ship, with its kerchiefed, Orientally-draped crowd, seemed to confront the serene castle of luxury
that rose, white and embattled, half way between stem and stern.

The sky was a flat, impenetrable pink, and from just to the right of the bows a single backbone of
gilt, feathery cloud glowed and slanted, like a vast spruce tree about to fall transversely, up into
the pale blue peak of the heavens. It had, the sky, something of a garish splendour, to which the
slatey-blue, unchangeable sea seemed to offer a saturnine comment, and from time to time Mrs
Sargent led to their feet, for presentation to these extraordinary Europeans who were travelling to
the other side "for pleasure," small bands of what they had come to call " Them." They made in
this way the acquaintance of a Scottish Presbyterian minister from an aristocratic suburb of
Philadelphia, who told them that there was no coal smoke in New York; of a lady whose husband
owned a button factory in Froudeville, Connecticut; of a judge from Decatur, Illinois; of the son
of a distinguished family called Callum of Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, and of a Mr Houston of
Brooklyn, who told them, in gentle and despondent tones, that whatever they did they were to
avoid the

Hotel in a street whose number he could not

just remember. And each of these people cordially endorsed the remark with which, successively,
Mrs Sargent introduced them - that they were going to the land to see sunsets. The lady from
Froudeville added the rider that they'd find New York very strange but that they'd like it
immensely when they got used to it. To which the judge's son added that they were not to think
that N'York was America, it was just a sink. It appeared afterwards that by this image he had
meant to imply nothing opprobrious, but merely that New York, in its cosmopolitan character,
was merely the channel - or, as you might say, the funnel into which the wealth of the
Transatlantic continent forced itself in its way eastward. But all these silhouettes with querulous
voices waved their arms towards the invisible sun and the western skies. The sunset, indeed, they
assured her was but a first note of what, hospitably and charmingly, they were going to do for
them. And Eleanor's protest, wrung from her at the fifth repetition, that they were not thirty-six
hours out from Europe so that the sunset might as well be called the last taste of what Europe
could do for them - Eleanor's protest, for which she felt a certain contrition, was summarily
quashed by her Aunt Emmeline. She was inclined to put the sunset down to the sturdy
Protestantism and the energy of the Transatlantic race. They went, she explained, together: skies
and energy being synonymous, for was not it a scientific fact that climate had a vast influence
upon character? And inviting the gentle Mr Houston and Mrs Sargent to take the dark, vacant
chairs next her own, she sent Augustus, who happened at the moment to pass at Don's side, down
to her maid's cabin to inquire for a volume of his father's sermons, in which, by a coincidence,
that idea of Transatlantic vigour and the occidental skies was rhetorically foreshadowed. And
Don, being roundly accused by Aunt Emmeline of unsociability, was constrained amiably to
hook one of his long arms round an iron stay and to hoist himself into a sitting posture upon the
hard rail; where, silhouetted, too, against the paling sky - the gigantic gilt spruce tree had
become a roisterous old man's head - he listened to Mrs Sargent's upbraiding of Mr Houston,
who, in the light of the electric lamp that glowed by now from the ceiling above the chairs,



had revealed himself as a small, old, tired-looking gentleman in a Homburg hat and with a short
goat's beard. He repeated that he had not been able to sleep in the hotel in 2gth Street, and to Mrs
Sargent's reprimand that it was unpatriotic and altogether un-American to let an Englishman
imagine that the worst American hotel could be worse than the very best English hotel, he
repeated once more that he supposed, under correction, it was not the best way to give English
visitors a good impression of the States to direct them to an hotel under which they were blasting
a tunnel. And whilst Mrs Sargent was demonstrating that to sleep over a tunnel in preparation
would be just the thing to give English visitors an idea of the overflowing industry and energy of
New York  " So that you get them again both ways! " Don could not help interjecting  Mrs
Greville had turned the topic into that of the social organisations attached to American churches.

In that, too, Mrs Sargent assured her, America was exceedingly "live." After slightly sketching
the relative positions, socially, of the congregations attaching to various churches - it remotely
shocked Don, for Aunt Emmeline's sake, to hear her say that the Protestant Episcopal
congregation mostly consisted of kitchenmaids - Mrs Sargent gave instances of this activity:
instancing the fact that at Hey don, N.J., the Christian Scientists had, in the vestibule of their new
church, a barber's saloon, so that gentlemen - and ladies too - might appear as seemly as
possible at the services: and concluding with the triumphant fact that the Rev. Mr Campbell, the
Scottish minister to whom they had been presented and whom they remembered as having told
them that there was no coal smoke in New York, had erected in his vestryhouse a quick-lunch
bar, a tape machine in direct contact with Wall Street, and a telephone, telegraph and
messenger-boy service.

"Mr Campbell," Mrs Sargent said, "has in his congregation some of the wealthiest men in the
city, men to whom the delay of a minute might mean the loss of a fortune."

And whilst Mrs Greville was, approvingly, saying that the only inefficient parallel that her
churches had had was the habit of calling doctors out of service if anyone were ill, Mrs Sargent
was saying that it proved her own broadmindedness, inasmuch as, whilst she thus eulogised the
Rev. Campbell, she herself was a Catholic.

"You won't  find in America," she said, "any of the narrow intolerance that there is on the other
side."

And Mr Houston's timid "No, indeed! " which resembled more than anything else a clearing of
his thin brown throat, was emphasised by a much more audible "No, indeed! " from Aunt
Emmeline.

Don lost himself in conjectures as to what exactly could be Mrs Greville's little game. And as he
averaged it out she must imagine herself at last in a milieu where her social, ecclesiastical and
organising excellences would enable her to shine as they had not - even in the good days of her
husband's episcopacy - enabled her to shine anywhere yet. As she would see it, he mused, she
was amongst an infinite number - the representatives of eighty millions - of absolutely
middle-class people. Not one of the individuals that she saw around her could be reasonably
"placed" at all in her mind. So that she had only, whilst paying a purely temporary deference to
their odd opinions, to reveal herself as a real Bishop's wife, to stand forth as an absolute dictator
of manners, district-visiting and the disciplining of minor clergy.

And she confirmed him in this speculation - just as Eleanor, by stirring in her chair, exhibited
the symptoms that he so much desired, to join him - by suddenly telling him to go and see what
had become of Augustus and the volume of her husband's sermons. For she had remembered - 
with regard to Mrs Sargent's claim for a height of tolerance in the United States - a certain
sermon of her husband's preached before a ruri-diaconal conference. In this she had herself
forced the bishop to say that if the Roman Catholics would abandon some of their heresies, and
the Nonconformists were to abandon some of their stiffneckedness, how exceedingly good it
would be for the Church. For, as Don realised, it is extremely difficult to inform a lady who will
not listen to you that you are the wife of a Bishop. Whereas a titlepage can't  be ignored.

In the course of long wanderings in the deeper stages of the ship, with their slight but persistent
odours, their slight but insistent creakings of polished wood and,their perspectives that seemed
infinite, Don several times lost his way. It is indeed one of the most difficult things in the world,
when you have turned a number of corners, gone down and up a number of oscillating staircases,
to retain in your mind just where you are or even to realise whether you are going towards the
stem or the stern. And having discovered that Aunt Emmeline's maid was too overcome to begin
to consider the problem of finding where in the world Aunt Emmeline's copy of her husband's
treatises might be  she addressed instead, through the crack of her door, to Don and the
stewardess the unanswerable riddle: Why had she ever left Reading? , Don was faced with the
problem of discovering what had become of Augustus. He had, the stewardess said, shown, poor
gentleman, half an hour before, unmistakable signs of wishing that he had never come to that
atmosphere. From there he vanished.

Don in his kind-heartedness could not think of taking his valet away from a vastly congenial and
just-learned game of poker in the smoking-room, as indeed he would not have thought of leaving
poor Augustus to a mere valet. And, his heart filled with concern, and dominated too with a
dread that Eleanor might have turned in, Don coursed through what appeared to be miles of
passages of shining white paint, shining mahogany and stifled creakings, up to a region where the
white paint gave way to fumed oak and painted panels representing cornucopias, birds of
paradise or nymphs. He coursed out along wind-swept promenade decks, peeped at familiar faces
of the prostrate occupiers of deck chairs. He found, in their private saloon with the yellow and
gilt velvet, Mr Greville, lean, rigid and attentive, and in the Socratic manner, extracting from the
captain, who was a blaze of gilt bindings, red face and golden, harsh hair, facts as to the
conditions of service in the United States mercantile marine.

Because the captain was stiffly anxious to make the acquaintance of Don, whom he called "Mr
Ke-Greville," Don was forced to stay and admire the aster heads, each as large as a mop, that the
captain had done himself the pleasure of sending in for the ladies of the party. There was not,
indeed, anything fulsome about the captain, though, upon hearing the cause of Don's concern, he
offered to place at his disposal one of his mates to find Augustus. But it was minutely
disagreeable to Don to be called "Mr Ke-Greville." And he seemed to read into the captain's
hard-bitten, defensive blue eyes the fact that with each word he uttered Captain Mulock was
saying really: "Look here, you're my owner. But you can't  promote me for you've  nothing bigger
in this line to give. And you can't , if you're a decent man, deprive me of the ship, for I'm
impeccable."

"Oh, well " - Don was driven to take the bull by the horns - " I trust you'll respect my desire for
secrecy. I've  got reasons that I'm sure you'd approve yourself." And when the captain laid a great
red hand upon the evening shirt-front that gave to his gilded broadcloth a final and tremendous
finish, and assured him that he'd taken to America two duchesses, a French Ambassador and an
English Cabinet Minister without a soul's even having learnt that they'd been in the States, Don
followed his advice and sought for Augustus in the extreme bow and the extreme stern.

"It's what they all want," he said. "Darkness



and privacy," and he laughed a cordial and jovial laugh. He'd crossed the Atlantic, he said, man
and boy, three hundred times.

The episode aroused in Don a vague disquiet, for it reminded him again that he owned all this . . .
all this! He had not remembered the fact half a dozen times in the course of the two days. Yet to
all intents and purposes it was true. He owned it and it was only an infinitesimal part of his
possessions that he knew each minute grew and grew. It was worse, the feeling, when he came
among the emigrants, with whom the warm, still night had filled the dark chasms of the
encumbered decks. They sat on great iron discs, they hung on to steel ropes, they lay on the
smoothed boards, half invisible and wholly unrealisable. You could not distinguish them by
names any more than you could tell where one class of the ship began and the other ended once
you were out of the central castle. And the feeling dominated him when he had found Augustus
leaning beside the flagstaff at the stern and had been simply damned for suggesting that there the
motion of the vessel was at its worst. And in that darkness, where Augustus appeared nothing but
a huddled, disagreeable black mass, lifted up and down against the horizon, it struck Don that he
could not even understand Augustus!

In the half way between the stern and the central elevation, where the steerage passengers were
massed, some of them had got hold of a storm lamp and had hung it from a bridge that spanned
the dark deck. And to the sound of a concertina jerkily wheezing out the air of a Parisian waltz, a
pair of Tyrolese - the man in a wide hat with a black cock's plume, dragging his leg as a
barnyard cock does, and with a bearded face and ferociously glistening teeth, the woman in short
skirts with white stockings - danced, he intermittently sending out a volley of hand-smackings
from his knees, his thighs, his ankles, and even his heels, to the rhythm which was marked by the
clapping of a pail handle. In the same ring the sombre-skirted figure of a solitary man,
Roumanian, Wallachian or Cypriote, was turning reservedly as if in a very slow Highland Fling,
his hands above his head. And in the dusky niche around them faces indistinguishable - Jewish,
Oriental, Italian, blonde, red-haired, or eager like those of London street arabs - peered out and
muttered. Don asked in German of a shawled figure, half distinguishable near him,where she
came from and where she was going. She drew the shawl closer over her head and moved an inch
or two away. Not one of all these people noticed him - and obviously in this crowd of strange
figures nothing could be noticeable. Not even the dusky Roumanian in his skirts. And he would
never know where one of them came from or what they came out to seek. What could he - who,
after all, had immense power - do for these people? He might make one - he might make them
all - rich! But what good would that do? The good that they needed was to be taught that good
did not come with riches. Yet in all probability they were flying from the tangible ills of hunger,
cold, oppression, rapine and even butchery. They sought, perhaps, some of them, Liberty. Yet
 ocr errors 

most of them probably were attracted by deeds such as those of his father's, who had been born in
a workhouse to die with an infinite power - to do what? To drink wine? buy women? purchase
votes? What, in the inscrutable depths of these poor minds, did immense wealth signify? There
might be - there probably were - in the thousand or so of them great artists, great thinkers, who
went to seek the purely idealistic. How, if he set himself the task - if he interpreted his mission
as that of helping those who came first to his hand - how was he to ascertain whose ideals were
infinite freedom, whose were infinite opportunities for bestiality, or whose simply the desire for
opportunities to live and think? What could he do? - what could he do for any of them?

A profound discouragement overcame him. He remembered the miles of white and mahogany
passages in the centre of the ship. What ideals had all the people who, in the warmth and
tranquillised security, slept in those innumerable precisely similar cells? And this ship that to all
intents and purposes he owned was only an infinitesimal fragment of the whole of his problem.
For his problem embraced all humanity. He was at that moment the wealthiest - and to that
extent the most powerful - of all the men in the world. But what he wanted to do was to use his
power to influence minds. Otherwise he could give all these people an extravagantly good dinner,
a circus entertainment, or present each one of them with an Old Glory in satin stars and stripes.
He might give every tenth man a hundred thousand dollars and see what came of it .

And although that sort of thing did not appeal to him he could not be certain - he had insight
enough to be uncertain - that that sort of thing precisely wasn't  the best thing that he could do.
He might, in that way, form the basis of a fortune for some poet or some thinker great enough to
influence all the United States, all these cartloads of emigrants, all the world. In the sort of
semi-socialist ideals in which he had been brought up, which dominated pretty well the whole
world, the panacea was undoubtedly something in the way of examinations, scholarships,
investigations of some sort. Then ought he to hold some sort of examination of all the population
of the ship? But what sort of examination? Had any good really come to the world with the
prevalence of that school of thought? Was the United States any the better for it - or humanity?
He thought it was.

But, on the other hand, had not all his ideals come from past ages when certainly examinations
had not even been discovered. Was not, at bottom, the feeling that dominated all these miles of
corridors loathsome, dull, uniform, materialistic? Was there in all this miracle of modernity a
single touch of poetry or of the finer feelings? If there were - and he did not deny it - he had not
yet discovered it. And if he could not discover even the spark of it how was he - he! - to fire it
into a blaze?

Before his eyes that central castle rose up, dark, but glowing through many portholes, so that it
appeared to have inside a glowing and radiant centre - like the turnip-headed ghost of a country
churchyard! He stood among the nameless crowd and it rose up inaccessible to them.

But was it like a castle? No, it was square, it was obviously of iron plate: at the top the monstrous
forms of huge ventilators turned to right and left. The galleries that were formed by the layers of
decks made it have a little the air of a Chinese pagoda. But it was not even like a Chinese
pagoda; it had not any quaintness, any grace of outline. It was not like part of a seafaring vessel;
it was not like anything. Or yes! It was like a gigantic packing-case jammed down on to the
gracious lines of a vessel. That was what they had done for ships - he and his. They had filled its
real decks with a huddled, nameless crowd: they had jammed a packing-case down upon its hold.

And yet, he was aware, ships had been fine, graceful, air-swept vehicles for the Finer Spirit. But
it seemed to him that this ship - this ship of his - was nothing but an offence, with its trail of
smoke to the august, black heavens and the vast swarms of blazing stars. There was not,
probably, on that whole vessel a person that you could "place ": there was not a name that
mattered.

The decks of the packing-case were nearly deserted now. In the topmost gallery but one a single
figure moved round and round, appearing in the light of one side, disappearing in that of the
other. They were going to sleep there. Here around him the sounds of the concertina, the clapping
of the pail handles, still went up ...

Perhaps the fact that the people in the packing



case had not any names and could not be placed - perhaps the very fact that they were all so
hopelessly middle-class and fluctuating would make his task easier. It is, after all, easier to
destroy a packingcase than a feudal castle or even a Chinese pagoda. There were not there any
castes, any ranks, any classes to whom the shedding of blood had given an almost moral
significance and stability. It might then be easier to infuse into these people a great ideal - an
ideal of solidarity, of self-sacrifice, of cooperation - an ideal of a Greatness distinct from the
acquisition of riches or of the power to "bluff!" They could not, those two national ideals, have
taken a very deep hold. It was a matter of such very recent history, this tradition of evil that had
been founded by men like his father. He was not very strong in history: but was not the
"millionaire" the product of the half century since '49? Was not he a figure that another half
century might consign to oblivion? Because, precisely, you could not place them. They had not
the prescriptive rights of having done a service to the community that, in the old world, made one
tender to a certain gens, to certain families. It was, was it not? the Transatlantic social mill, just
one ant-heap in which any ant struggled through the mass to the outside on the top. You could
pull down an ant-heap. You could clear away that central packing-case and the lines of the ship
would be once more revealed. After all, what was the sense of writing up First " Class" or Second
"Class" on a vessel that went towards the West? It was not a matter of class: it was a

matter of a few more coins out of the breeches pocket.

Then assuredly these class limits could be swept away from the vessel with a very small struggle.
You would perhaps be able to do it by uttering the, to the American, damning word
"undemocratic." For assuredly that ideal was very strong even with the Mrs Sargents.

Supposing he were to inaugurate his sway of this "line" by uttering a manifesto that all class
distinctions were precisely anti-national. Supposing he were to build steamers without that
central mass, but clean, roomy, fine from stem to stern. And then he might issue a bold challenge
to all American users of boats, daring them to travel by any others at the risk of being called
un-American. Would not that be a great step? And would not the example of it bear fruit even in
Europe: would not it cause, even there, a further stage in the gradual euthanasia of class
distinctions that was going on all over the world. Example! Was not that really the thing that
counted? His father's wide example had done much harm: might not his, by that device, create a
new standard? For he had heard it advanced again and again against his countrymen that what
they needed, what they absolutely lacked, was precisely standards!

And then - because he had not gone to school at Harrow or mixed with Tories for nothing - 
there came into his head the discouraging idea that no law ever acts as it is intended to do. You
pass a law to restrict the number of drink-shops and the children see their parents drink at home
and the streets are filled with female drunkards - so that Heaven knew what would be the effect
of abolishing the classes on his ships. He could not see that any evil would result: but it might
mean the disappearance for ever of any mingling of European and American culture. Decent
people might refuse to travel. You simply could not tell how it would influence ideals! You
couldn't  tell anything. He wanted to help the people pent up before him to a purer type of ideals;
he wanted intensely to help all these poor people round him.

He felt for his watch: it seemed to him that he must have lost hours - that Eleanor would be in
bed by now. But his watch wasn't  there. He supposed he must have left it in his berth. Yet his
pocket-book wasn't  there: his cigarette-case was gone - even his handkerchief. It annoyed him - 
because his pocketbook contained one of Eleanor's letters. However, he had Eleanoi . . .

Of course there would be criminals going to the United States. And he wondered what their
ideals were.

Up on the third deck in front of him there appeared, at the angle, beneath the light, the figure of
Mr Houston. Small, his Homburg hat on the back of his head, his hands deep in the pockets of
his smooth black overcoat, his little beard pointing nearly horizontally, he appeared to gaze at
something far off in the night.

And suddenly it occurred to Don that it was absurd to say you can't  "place " Americans. This
gentle and tolerant old man with the low, trustable voice was Mr Houston of Brooklyn. Half the
people on the packing-case would know him as coming of a good family who had lived in
Columbia Road for generations. Mr Houston had "retired," which wasn't  quite American, but it
was condoned by the ill-health that showed in every line of his figure. It didn't  count at all that
the Houstons for generations had made their money by manufacturing stovepipe elbows. What
mattered, even to the people of the packing-case, was that the Houstons had been distinguished
for probity, gentleness and benevolence - for character, in short. And wasn't  that just as much a
class distinction as anything else? Wouldn't  it be as cruel not to provide a little privacy for this
poor old man with his need for quiet as to force Eleanor to mix with the people who had picked
his pocket?

Mr Houston moved his head round on his thin neck and uttered some inaudible words, and
immediately afterwards Eleanor, muffled to the eyes in a golf cape, came to stand beside him and
to follow the direction of his hand into the night.

And whilst in rejoining them Don once more lost himself in the mazes of the packing-case,
coming out in a bewildering way where, beneath a rather dim light, the second-class passengers
lay about under undistinguished-looking shawls, finding the grille drawn along the long deck and
mounting more corridor stairs, utterly unable to locate the particular gallery upon which he had
seen them, Don was wondering in his mind whether actually Eleanor had any more claim to
consideration than Mr Houston. He was quite aware that she wouldn't  nowadays get it. Modern
philosophy would have it that to manufacture stove-pipe elbows was as glorious a thing as to
crack them - and wasn't  mediaeval warfare a matter of cracking with a steel bar a stove pipe on
another man's head? So that considering an individual to be no more than a link in the chain of
his family, wasn't  Mr Houston as precious metal as were Eleanor and her father? Was he or
wasn't  he? He represented the manufacture of stove pipes, she only their destruction.

Every modern creed would give the answer that he was better: Mrs Sargent would say so: his
Fabian friends would say so - even Eleanor might be sufficiently moved by the life all round her,
or by the enunciations of her friend the Canon to say that Peace hath her victories and the rest of
it. But was it true? Was it true in the sense of the Eternal Verities and apart from modern
accepted Ideals? Was not Eleanor, as representing people who had really acted in their own
persons, of a more vital tradition than Mr Houston, whose ancestry had merely taken the profits
of poor wretches' toil?

Before he could feel himself equipped to do anything he would have to settle in his mind all
these mere first principles. He felt it himself, but it was forcibly put to him in these very words
by Mr Greville ten minutes later. He had found Eleanor hanging on to Mr Houston's gentle
support and walking very slowly along the covered deck, from above which the globular lamps
sent down a soft



glow on their figures. Mr Houston seemed to have discovered a soft, ancient elective affinity for
her. With his black-gloved, thin hands he was fending their roll from the side-rail, and he was
telling her, as a good joke, how he had taken a row-boat full of oranges to the lighthouse men of
the most northerly lighthouse in the world. He had seen from the North Cape the tower on the
horizon and he had said: Hullo, he supposed those fellows would like some oranges. He had
started on his voyage round the world with a truck load of California oranges - and he still had
some left in the steamer's refrigerators. And as he leaned back, small, brown-faced,
white-bearded and gentle-eyed, promising her, as he resigned her to Don, to send her a few for
herself to-morrow morning, he seemed to be offering her the homage due from the representative
of one fine tradition to another. Noble natures, after all, leap to each other across the ages as
across the waters ship salutes ship. . . . And Eleanor, catching her arm into Don's, remarked, as
she watched the old man's figure timidly disappearing into the narrow saloon doorway, that he
was a rather charming old person. He had, it seemed, been offering his tribute of California
oranges to elect natures all over the globe. And what more, Don asked himself, could he demand
of his countryman?

But the young people hadn't  made more than one turn of the quarter-mile deck - they hadn't 
indeed dismissed Mr Houston and his adventures from their conversation before they were joined
by Mr Greville, who, with his lean features, his frock-coat and soft, wide-awake-like scholar's
hat, resembled, extraordinarily in the lights and shades, Uncle Sam himself. As Eleanor, saluting
him gaily, said: "You couldn't  have told he wasn't  an American."

"Ah, wait till you hear him speak," Don answered gaily too.

For, linked to Eleanor, who in turn linked herself to her father, he seemed to feel that they had a
solidarity - perhaps it came from their added surefootedness now that the wind was freshening.
It was as if they were indeed a family, he and they; as if he had acquired their point of view. He
didn't  seem any more to float, lost and alone. The water roared past them, an infinitely little space
of white dimly seen, an infinitely vast space of solid black; the wind, catching them, caused them
to pause a little at the forward corner and sent them hurrying a little down the other side, where,
at the far angle, a man in a grotesquely-shaped ear-cap leaned over the rail, gazing at the blurred
stars. The lights and the noises had died away in the inscrutable blackness of the ship's forward
deck. There was nothing any longer visible save the black fantastic forms of windlasses and
spars, adding with their deeper shadows to shadows already black. And as the ship sped on,
leaving in the mind the impression of something immense, trustworthy and intent on its end,
through the night, trackless and enigmatic, it seemed to Don - it was an impression rather than
any reasoned evolution - that all these people, far beneath his feet now, had sunk literally into
still deeper depths of unimportance. They didn't  matter, they were the raw material, the ore with
which one worked - without names, without traditions, with nothing but a future that he should
have to mould.

It was then that Mr Greville delivered himself of his apothegm, after Don had delivered himself
of a tranquillised version of his searchings of the soul - a version that in relation to his former
vividness of feelings was as the packing-case on which he stood was to the depths from which he
had looked up.

"What you ought to do," Mr Greville said, "is to find yourself."

He hadn't  got to bother about trains of thought, but about what he wanted. And Mr Greville
hazarded the further speech:

"If a man is determined to inflict himself on his time it is his duty first to consider what he is! For
what is criminal is to wobble once you have begun. A man has to define what his ideal is and
then to make for it."

"Ah," Don said, "that is what people have been telling me all my life ..."

"Study, if you've  got the brain " - Mr Greville cut him short - " or if you haven't , and have the
temperance, let things alone. You'll do less harm if you let things alone. But you'll do infinitely
more if, once you've  begun to meddle, you change your mind!" He spoke without any passion. It
wasn't , assuredly, any business of his to meddle with other people.

It was Eleanor who imparted the personal note.

"Whatever you do is so certain to be kind that . - ."

"That I'm rather to strain after effects that seem cruel?" Don asked her. "I'm to strain for such
effects as drowning new-born puppies if they're likely to prove mongrels."

She didn't  quite follow his image, and, under cover of her pause for reflection, he got away into
the reminiscence he was determined upon.

"When I was in Paris," he said, " I worked in an atilier where Whistler used to visit. He made me
his monitor. I had to call silence for him and turn round canvases on easels. I thought I was rather
fine. But when the atelier broke up, principally because he wouldn't  visit it regularly, he told me
to come and see him. `Look here,` he said, `you think I made you monitor because I thought you
were promising. You aren't . You're a hopeless duffer. But you're pleasant. That's why I chose
you! `" And when Don, crushed but valiant, had asked the master what he meant, the master had
turned, wasplike, upon a sketch of his own. `Look there,` he said, `that's painted. That's a
masterpiece. Look at that spade! But you'll never paint. You never will see. You're a poet. Go
and write little verses. Go and moon about.` And when he was still further pressed he had
brought
out: `You can't  paint a spade because you can't  see the thing that the light plays on; you see the
hunger in the entrails of the peasant who's going to dig with it! You can't  paint hunger!`"

And whilst Eleanor brought out: "What a rude bear he always was! " Mr Greville formulated:

"Did you ever reflect on those words?"

He cut, however, Don's flow of protest that he never thought about anything else short with the
words that whilst he always saw so many aspects of everything he couldn't  ever expect to do
anything. It was a form of laziness.

"And I don't  see," he finished, "why you can't  be content to go on being lazy."

And whilst Don was protesting that the thought of people who talked like Mrs Sargent goaded
him to desperation, Mr Greville again cut him short.

"If all you're going to do in throwing your money away is to attempt to change Mrs Sargent and
her people, it is sheer waste of effort; she'll be an odious fool whatever you give her for example.
You won't  change their hearts or give them intellects. That class of intellect is the same in
England or America. They'll always be the same whether you gather the wealth of your country
into two hands or distribute it to the eighty million."

And having delivered this staggerer he unlinked his arm from Eleanor's and announced that he
was going to fetch his book. He had already erected a custom to suit his new environment, that of
sitting in a deck chair in the evenings and studying a United States Baedeker for an hour before
turning in. He was intent on getting for himself the lie of the streets in several American towns,
so that he would never have to ask the way supposing that - which he doubted - the inscriptions
on American street corners were to be found or trusted.

At the mere mention of this desire Don had sprung forward to the deck door and was fetching

 
 
 
 
Page images
 
PDF
 
EPUB

the Baedeker. And Eleanor, up in the darkness with her father, fenced the question that she really
wanted to ask by asking another.

"Father," it came, "why don't  you ever like to ask your way?"

He surveyed her with what, in his affectionate gaze, was almost surprise, as if she ought to have
understood.

"I'm sure," she continued, " you're always asking people other questions."

"My dear," he said, "if you'll observe you'll see that I never ask for information as to facts."

"You only collect foolish points of view?" she said, thinking of the red-haired lady.

"I collect points of view," he answered, avoiding her adjective. "If I want information - facts
upon which I'm going to act myself - I find out for myself. I should advise you to pursue the
same course."

She buttoned the golf cape more closely under her chin as a gust of wind from out of the
gleaming and black void took the two of them, whirling her white skirts about his legs.

"Of course it makes one tremendously sure," she said musingly. "But it leaves one a frightfully
narrow field."

He was looking at the in visible windward of the ship.

"What does one want to do a lot of things for?" he asked, and descending from his impossible
generalities to his affection and politeness he asked once more: "Don and you know the
Yorkshire saying: `A little farm well tilled, A little wife well willed, A little purse well filled`? - 
that's all you want!"

"But there are great ideas, aren't  there?" she countered him absently - intent on defending Don.

"There aren't  - great - facts! " he said slowly.

And suddenly she brought out her real question: "What are we going for?"

He went slowly to his deck chair, picked up his dark plaid shawl and draped it round the
shoulders of his frock coat. He returned to her, and standing before her, although he strongly
disliked answering questions, he gave it her full in the face.

"To look after Don!"

"But, dear," she said, as she began to digest this statement, "you know I'm provided for whatever
he does."

Her father leaned back against the ship's rail and extracted one hand from the rug that shrouded
his shoulder.

"So that " - she pursued her commentary on his words - " you aren't  looking after my interests.
It's him!"

She reflected and then said softly:

"He is rather a dear, isn't  he? You do like him?"

Her father, leaning, draped, back against the rails, still didn't  answer her. But at last he said:

"Probably pickpockets couldn't  strip him fast enough to leave him naked. But tell me what he's
paying Augustus ten thousand a year for?"

This hit Eleanor so closely that she started.

"It's really great folly," she said, "all the same, if Augustus appeals to him ..."

"Yes!" Her father caught her up. "It's the things that appeal to him that will play the mischief with
everything he attempts. He'll never do anything. He's like every manifestation of his country - 
hysterical."

She said softly:

"If you like him so much, dear, aren't  you a little hard on him?"

He crooked his large forefinger at her from somewhere near his hips.

"You know I'm not," he said. "And don't  run away with any false ideas, I'm not in love with Don.
But if he's going to do a certain piece of work I want him to do it cleanly. I shouldn't  have given
myself all this trouble and derangement for the sake of what he'd call his beaux yeux." He looked
at her solemnly, but with a certain trouble in his eyes. "It amounts to this: He's bound, in the
nature of events, to be brought up against me, with all his troubles, for as long as I've  got to live.
He'll constantly be depressing you: you'll constantly be coming to me. I don't  want to meddle
with him or his problems. But I shall have to."

"You mean," she asked, "that he'll be losing his money foolishly and asking you, through me, to
retrieve it."

"Child," he said, "you're astonishingly naive still. It isn't  the money he'll lose that will distress
him. He can't  lose money enough. He'll find his father's tied it up too well. It's the silly things
he'll do every time anything appeals to him. He'll found Institutions and find they breed beastlier
chaps than ever. He'll raise co-operative factories and find the hands will dissipate all their profits
in shove halfpenny. I wouldn't  mind wagering that he'll try to purify the municipal politics of
some wretched town, and he'll find that his money is being used by his reforming, lieutenants to
bribe into existence the worst Tammany that's ever been known. And I shall be forced to pay
attention to all these muddles. That's why I'm coming with you."

"You poor old dad! " Eleanor said softly, "you think that you'll be able to guide him."

He stirred uneasily.

"No, you don't ," she said quickly, " you think that the companionship of a sensible man may
harden his backbone a little at the start."

And she added as swiftly, whilst Don appeared a long way away with the Baedeker in his hand:

"Don't  you think we're both of us agitating ourselves, possibly for nothing? Isn't  it just as likely as
not he'll see so many aspects of misanthropy that he'll never make up his mind to do anything at
all, ever?"

As Mr Greville drew himself to an erect posture on the deck he uttered, almost with tones of
misgiving:

"You talk as if you were an old married woman."

"Well, you made us understand that you wanted a long engagement," she answered. "I've  had
time to get used to him by now."
